# Containers


Containers also exist in programming, to make it easier to create and manage (potentially large) collections of objects. In general programming, a **container** is a data type that provides storage for a collection of unnamed objects (called **elements**).

## The elements of a container are unnamed

## The length of a container

In programming, the number of elements in a container is often called it’s **length** (or sometimes **count**).

## Container operations

Containers typically implement a significant subset of the following operations:

- Create a container (e.g. empty, with storage for some initial number of elements, from a list of values).
- Access to elements (e.g. get first element, get last element, get any element).
- Insert and remove elements.
- Get the number of elements in the container.

## Element types

In most programming languages (including C++), containers are **homogenous**, meaning the elements of a container are required to have the same type.

## Containers in C++

The **Containers library** is a part of the C++ standard library that contains various class types that implement some common types of containers. A class type that implements a container is sometimes called a **container class**.

# Introduction to arrays

An **array** is a container data type that stores a sequence of values **contiguously** (meaning each element is placed in an adjacent memory location, with no gaps). Arrays allow fast, direct access to any element. 

C++ contains three primary array types: (C-style) arrays, the `std::vector` container class, and the `std::array` container class.

(C-style) arrays were inherited from the C language. For backwards compatibility, these arrays are defined as part of the core C++ language (much like the fundamental data types). The C++ standard calls these “arrays”, but in modern C++ these are often called **C arrays** or **C-style arrays** in order to differentiate them from the similarly named `std::array`. C-style arrays are also sometimes called “naked arrays”, “fixed-sized arrays”, “fixed arrays”, or “built-in arrays”. We’ll prefer the term “C-style array”, and use “array” when discussing array types in general. By modern standards, C-style arrays behave strangely and they are dangerous. We will explore why in a future chapter.

To help make arrays safer and easier to use in C++, the `std::vector` container class was introduced in C++03. `std::vector` is the most flexible of the three array types, and has a bunch of useful capabilities that the other array types don’t.

Finally, the `std::array` container class was introduced in C++11 as a direct replacement for C-style arrays. It is more limited than `std::vector`, but can also be more efficient, especially for smaller arrays.