# Fixed-size arrays vs dynamic arrays

Most array types have a significant limitation: the length of the array must be known at the point of instantiation, and then cannot be changed. Such arrays are called **fixed-size arrays** or **fixed-length arrays**. Both `std::array` and `C-style arrays` are fixed-size array types. We’ll discuss these further next chapter.

On the other hand, `std::vector` is a dynamic array. A **dynamic array** (also called a **resizable array**) is an array whose size can be changed after instantiation. This ability to be resized is what makes `std::vector` special.

# Resizing a `std::vector` at runtime

A `std::vector` can be resized after instantiation by calling the `resize()` member function with the new desired length:

```cpp
 std::vector v{ 0, 1, 2 }; // create vector with 3 elements
    std::cout << "The length is: " << v.size() << '\n';

    v.resize(5);              // resize to 5 elements
    std::cout << "The length is: " << v.size() << '\n';
```

```Output
The length is: 3
The length is: 5
```

There are two things to note here. First, when we resized the vector, the existing element values were preserved! Second, the new elements are value-initialized (which performs default-initialization for class types, and zero-initialization for other types). Thus the two new elements of type `int` were zero-initialized to value `0`.

Vectors may also be resized to be smaller:

```cpp
int main()
{
    std::vector v{ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 }; // length is initially 5
    printLength(v);

    v.resize(3);                    // resize to 3 elements
    printLength(v);

    for (int i : v)
        std::cout << i << ' ';
```

```Output
The length is: 5
The length is: 3
0 1 2
```

# The length vs capacity of a `std::vector`

Up to this point, we’ve only talked about the length of a `std::vector`. But `std::vector` also has a capacity. In the context of a `std::vector`, **capacity** is how many elements the `std::vector` has allocated storage for, and **length** is how many elements are currently being used.

# Getting the capacity of a `std::vector`

We can ask a `std::vector` for its capacity via the `capacity()` member function.

```cpp
void printCapLen(const std::vector<int>& v)
{
	std::cout << "Capacity: " << v.capacity() << " Length:"	<< v.size() << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    std::vector v{ 0, 1, 2 }; // length is initially 3

    printCapLen(v);

    for (auto i : v)
        std::cout << i << ' ';
    std::cout << '\n';

    v.resize(5); // resize to 5 elements

    printCapLen(v);

    for (auto i : v)
        std::cout << i << ' ';
    std::cout << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this prints the following:

```Output
Capacity: 3  Length: 3
0 1 2
Capacity: 5  Length: 5
0 1 2 0 0
```

# Reallocation of storage, and why it is expensive

When a `std::vector` changes the amount of storage it is managing, this process is called **reallocation**. Informally, the reallocation process goes something like this:

- The `std::vector` acquires new memory with capacity for the desired number of elements. These elements are value-initialized.
- The elements in the old memory are copied (or moved, if possible) into the new memory. The old memory is then returned to the system.
- The capacity and length of the `std::vector` are set to the new values.

From the outside, it looks like the `std::vector` has been resized. But internally, the memory (and all of the elements) have actually been replaced!

Because reallocation typically requires every element in the array to be copied, reallocation is an expensive process. As a result, we want to avoid reallocation as much as reasonable.

# Why differentiate length and capacity?

If a `std::vector` only kept track of its length, then every `resize()` request would result in an expensive reallocation to the new length. Separating length and capacity gives the `std::vector` the ability to be smarter about when reallocations are needed.

```cpp
/ Create a vector with length 5
    std::vector v{ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 };
    v = { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 }; // okay, array length = 5
    printCapLen(v);

    for (auto i : v)
        std::cout << i << ' ';
    std::cout << '\n';

    // Resize vector to 3 elements
    v.resize(3); // we could also assign a list of 3 elements here
    printCapLen(v);
	 for (auto i : v)
        std::cout << i << ' ';
    std::cout << '\n';

    // Resize vector back to 5 elements
    v.resize(5);
    printCapLen(v);

    for (auto i : v)
        std::cout << i << ' ';
    std::cout << '\n';

```

```Output
Capacity: 5  Length: 5
0 1 2 3 4 
Capacity: 5  Length: 3
0 1 2
Capacity: 5  Length: 5
0 1 2 0 0
```

# Vector indexing is based on length, not capacity

# Shrinking a `std::vector`

Resizing a vector to be larger will increase the vector’s length, and will increase its capacity if required. However, resizing a vector to be smaller will only decrease its length, and not its capacity.

Reallocating a vector just to reclaim the memory from a small number of elements that are no longer needed is a poor choice. However, in the case where we have a vector with a large number of elements that we no longer need, the memory waste could be substantive.

To help address this situation, `std::vector` has a member function called `shrink_to_fit()` that requests that the vector shrink its capacity to match its length. This request is non-binding, meaning the implementation is free to ignore it. Depending on what the implementation thinks is best, an implementation may decide to fulfill the request, may partially fulfill it (e.g. reduce the capacity but not all the way), or may completely ignore the request.

Here’s an example:

```cpp
std::vector<int> v(1000); // allocate room for 1000 elements
	printCapLen(v);

	v.resize(0); // resize to 0 elements
	printCapLen(v);

	v.shrink_to_fit();
	printCapLen(v);
```

On the author’s machine, this produces the following result:

```Output
Capacity: 1000  Length: 1000
Capacity: 1000  Length: 0
Capacity: 0  Length: 0
```