# Introduction to `std::vector`

`std::vector` is one of the container classes in the C++ standard containers library that implements an array. `std::vector` is defined in the \<vector> header as a class template, with a template type parameter that defines the type of the elements. Thus, `std::vector<int>` declares a `std::vector` whose elements are of type `int`.

Instantiating a `std::vector` object is straightforward:

```cpp
#include <vector>

int main()
{
	// Value initialization (uses default constructor)
	std::vector<int> empty{}; // vector containing 0 int elements

	return 0;
}
```

# Initializing a `std::vector` with a list of values

Initialize our container with those values. We can do this by using list initialization with the specific initialization values we want. For example:

```cpp
#include <vector>

int main()
{
	// List construction (uses list constructor)
	std::vector<int> primes{ 2, 3, 5, 7 };          // vector containing 4 int elements with values 2, 3, 5, and 7
	std::vector vowels { 'a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u' }; // vector containing 5 char elements with values 'a', 'e', 'i', 'o', and 'u'.  Uses CTAD (C++17) to deduce element type char (preferred).

	return 0;
}
```

# List constructors and initializer lists

Containers typically have a special constructor called a **list constructor** that allows us to construct an instance of the container using an initializer list. The list constructor does three things:
- Ensures the container has enough storage to hold all the initialization values (if needed).
- Sets the length of the container to the number of elements in the initializer list (if needed).
- Initializes the elements to the values in the initializer list (in sequential order).

# Accessing array elements using the subscript operator (operator[])

In C++, the most common way to access array elements is by using the name of the array along with the subscript operator (`operator[]`). To select a specific element, inside the square brackets of the subscript operator, we provide an integral value that identifies which element we want to select. This integral value is called a **subscript** (or informally, an **index**).
The first element is accessed using index 0, the second is accessed using index 1, etc…

Because the indexing starts with 0 rather than 1, we say arrays in C++ are **zero-based**.

# Subscript out of bounds

`operator[]` does not do any kind of **bounds checking**, meaning it does not check to see whether the index is within the bounds of 0 to N-1 (inclusive). Passing an invalid index to `operator[]` will return in undefined behavior.

# Arrays are contiguous in memory

One of the defining characteristics of arrays is that the elements are always allocated contiguously in memory, meaning the elements are all adjacent in memory (with no gaps between them).

This means arrays do not have any per-element overhead. It also allows the compiler to quickly calculate the address of any element in the array.

Arrays are one of the few container types that allow **random access**, meaning every element in the container can be accessed directly and with equal speed, regardless of the number of elements in the container. The ability to directly access any element quickly is the primary reason arrays are the container of choice.

# Constructing a `std::vector` of a specific length

Fortunately, `std::vector` has an explicit constructor (`explicit std::vector<T>(int)`) that takes a single int value defining the length of the `std::vector` to construct:

```cpp
std::vector<int> data( 10 ); // vector containing 10 int elements, value-initialized to 0
```

# List constructors take precedence over other constructors

To understand why the previous constructor must be called using direct initialization, consider this definition:

```cpp
std::vector<int> data{ 10 }; // what does this do?
```

There are two different constructors that match this initialization:

- `{ 10 }` can be interpreted as an initializer list, and matched with the list constructor to construct a vector of length 1 with value 10.
- `{ 10 }` can be interpreted as a single braced initialization value, and matched with the `std::vector<T>(int)` constructor to construct a vector of length 10 with elements value-initialized to 0.

Normally when a class type definition matches more than one constructor, the match is considered ambiguous and a compilation error results. However, C++ has a special rule for this case: A matching list constructor will be selected over other matching constructors. Without this rule, a list constructor would result in an ambiguous match with any constructor that took arguments of a single type.

Since `{ 10 }` can be interpreted as an initializer list and `std::vector` has a list constructor, the list constructor takes precedence in this case.

To help clarify what happens in various initialization cases further, let’s look at similar cases using copy, direct, and list initialization:

```cpp
// Copy init
std::vector<int> v1 = 10;     // 10 not an initializer list, copy init won't match explicit constructor: compilation error

// Direct init
std::vector<int> v2(10);      // 10 not an initializer list, matches explicit single-argument constructor

// List init
std::vector<int> v3{ 10 };    // { 10 } interpreted as initializer list, matches list constructor

// Copy list init
std::vector<int> v4 = { 10 }; // { 10 } interpreted as initializer list, matches list constructor
std::vector<int> v5({ 10 });  // { 10 } interpreted as initializer list, matches list constructor
```

## Tip
When a `std::vector` is a member of a class type, it is not obvious how to provide a default initializer that sets the length of a `std::vector` to some initial value:

```cpp
#include <vector>

struct Foo
{
    std::vector<int> v1(8); // compile error: direct initialization not allowed for member default initializers
};
```

When providing a default initializer for a member of a class type:

- We must use either copy initialization or list initialization.
- CTAD is not allowed (so we must explicitly specify the element type).

The answer is as follows:

```cpp
struct Foo
{
    std::vector<int> v{ std::vector<int>(8) }; // ok
};
```

This creates a `std::vector` with a capacity of 8, and then uses that as the initializer for `v`.

# Const and constexpr `std::vector`

Objects of type `std::vector` can be made `const`:

```cpp
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    const std::vector<int> prime { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 }; // prime and its elements cannot be modified

    return 0;
}
```

A `const std::vector` must be initialized, and then cannot be modified. The elements of such a vector are treated as if they were const.

The elements of a non-const `std::vector` must be non-const. Thus, the following is not permitted:

```cpp
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector<const int> prime { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
}
```

One of the biggest downsides of `std::vector` is that it cannot be made `constexpr`. If you need a `constexpr` array, use `std::array`.