[A review: sign conversions are narrowing conversions, except when constexpr](A review: sign conversions are narrowing conversions, except when constexpr)

# The length and indices of `std::vector` have type `size_type`

Each of the standard library container classes defines a nested typedef member named `size_type` (sometimes written as `T::size_type`), which is an alias for the type used for the length (and indices, if supported) of the container.

`size_type` is almost always an alias for `std::size_t`, but can be overridden (in rare cases) to use a different type.

*`size_type` is a nested typedef defined in standard library container classes, used as the type for the length (and indices, if supported) of the container class.*

*`size_type` defaults to `std::size_t`, and since this is almost never changed, we can reasonably assume `size_type` is an alias for `std::size_t`.*

# Getting the length of a `std::vector` using the `size()` member function or `std::size()`

We can ask a container class object for its length using the `size()` member function (which returns the length as unsigned `size_type`):

```cpp
    std::cout << "length: " << prime.size() << '\n'; // returns length as type `size_type` (alias for `std::size_t`)
```

In C++17, we can also use the `std::size()` non-member function (which for container classes just calls the `size()` member function).

```cpp
    std::cout << "length: " << std::size(prime); // C++17, returns length as type `size_type` (alias for `std::size_t`)

```

If we want to use either of the above methods to store the length in a variable with a signed type, this will likely result in a signed/unsigned conversion warning or error. The simplest thing to do here is static_cast the result to the desired type:

```cpp
    int length { static_cast<int>(prime.size()) }; // static_cast return value to int
    std::cout << "length: " << length ;
```

# Getting the length of a `std::vector` using `std::ssize()` C++20

C++20 introduces the `std::ssize()` non-member function, which returns the length as a large _signed_ integral type (usually `std::ptrdiff_t`, which is the type normally used as the signed counterpart to `std::size_t`):

If you want to use this method to store the length in a variable with a signed type, you have a couple of options.

First, because the `int` type may be smaller than the signed type returned by `std::ssize()`, if you are going to assign the length to an `int` variable, you should static_cast the result to `int` to make any such conversion explicit (otherwise you might get a narrowing conversion warning or error).

Alternatively, you can use `auto` to have the compiler deduce the correct signed type to use for the variable.

# Accessing array elements using `operator[]` does no bounds checking

```cpp
 std::cout << prime[3];  // print the value of element with index 3 (7)
    std::cout << prime[9]; // invalid index (undefined behavior)
```

# Accessing array elements using the `at()` member function does runtime bounds checking

The array container classes support another method for accessing an array. The `at()` member function can be used to do array access with runtime bounds checking:

```cpp
 std::cout << prime.at(3); // print the value of element with index 3
    std::cout << prime.at(9); // invalid index (throws exception)
```

In the above example, the call to `prime.at(3)` checks to ensure the index 3 is valid, and because it is, it returns a reference to array element 3. We can then print this value. However, the call to `prime.at(9)` fails (at runtime) because 9 is not a valid index for this array. Instead of returning a reference, the `at()` function generates an error that terminates the program.

# Indexing `std::vector` with a constexpr signed int

When indexing a `std::vector` with a constexpr (signed) int, we can let the compiler implicitly convert this to a `std::size_t` without it being a narrowing conversion:

```cpp
  constexpr int index { 3 };         // constexpr
    std::cout << prime[index] << '\n'; // okay: constexpr index implicitly converted to std::size_t, not a narrowing conversion
```

# Indexing `std::vector` with a non-constexpr value

The subscripts used to index an array can be non-const:

```cpp
 std::size_t index { 3 };           // non-constexpr
    std::cout << prime[index] << '\n'; // operator[] expects an index of type std::size_t, no conversion required
```

When our subscript is a non-constexpr signed value value, we run into problems:

```cpp
int index { 3 };                   // non-constexpr
    std::cout << prime[index] << '\n'; // possible warning: index implicitly converted to std::size_t, narrowing conversion
```

In this example, `index` is a non-constexpr signed int. The subscript of `operator[]` defined as part of `std::vector` has type `size_type` (an alias for `std::size_t`). Therefore, when we call `prime[index]`, our signed int must be converted to `std::size_t`.

Such a conversion should not be dangerous (because the index of a `std::vector` is expected to be non-negative, and a non-negative signed value will safely convert to an unsigned value). But when performed at runtime, this is considered to be a narrowing conversion, and your compiler should produce a warning about this being an unsafe conversion (if it doesn’t, you should consider modifying your warnings so that it does).

There are many possible ways to avoid this issue (e.g. `static_cast` your `int` to a `std::size_t` every time you index an array), but none that are convenient -- they all inevitably end up cluttering or complicating your code in some way.

The simplest thing to do in this case is use a variable of type `std::size_t` as your index, and do not use this variable for anything but indexing.