Because traversing (forwards) through an array is such a common thing to do, C++ supports another type of for-loop called a **range-based for loop** (also sometimes called a **for-each loop**) that allows traversal of a container without having to do explicit indexing. Range-based for loops are simpler, safer, and work with all the common array types in C++ (including `std::vector`, `std::array`, and C-style arrays).

# Range-based for loops

The _range-based for_ statement has a #syntax that looks like this:

```
for (element_declaration : array_object)
   statement;
```

When a range-based for loop is encountered, the loop will iterate through each element in `array_object`. For each iteration, the value of the current array element will be assigned to the variable declared in `element_declaration`, and then `statement` will execute.

For best results, `element_declaration` should have the same type as the array elements, otherwise type conversion will occur.

Here’s a simple example that uses a _range-based for_ loop to print all of the elements in an array named `fibonacci`:

```cpp
std::vector fibonacci { 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89 };

    for (int num : fibonacci) // iterate over array fibonacci and copy each value into `num`
       std::cout << num << ' '; // print the current value of `num`
```

Because `num` is assigned the value of the array element, this does mean the array element is copied (which can be expensive for some types).

# Range-based for loops and type deduction using the `auto` keyword

Because `element_declaration` should have the same type as the array elements (to prevent type conversion from occurring), this is an ideal case in which to use the `auto` keyword, and let the compiler deduce the type of the array elements for us.

```cpp
for (auto num : fibonacci) // compiler will deduce type of num to be `int`
       std::cout << num << ' ';
```

# Avoid element copies using references

Consider the following range-based for loop, which iterates over an array of `std::string`.
We can reference the actual array element by making our `element_declaration` a (const) reference:

```cpp
using namespace std::literals; // for s suffix for std::string literals
    std::vector words{ "peter"s, "likes"s, "frozen"s, "yogurt"s }; // std::vector<std::string>

    for (const auto& word : words) // word is now a const reference
        std::cout << word << ' ';
```

In the above example, `word` is now a const reference. With each iteration of this loop, `word` will be bound to the next array element. This allows us to access the array element’s value without having to make an expensive copy.

If the reference is non-const, it can also be used to change the values in the array (something not possible if our `element_declaration` is a copy of the value).

# Consider always using `const auto&` when you don’t want to work with copies of elements

Normally we’d use `auto` for cheap-to-copy types, and `const auto&` for expensive-to-copy types. But with range-based for loops, many developers believe it is preferable to always use `const auto&` because it is more future-proof.

- Don’t use type deduction in your range-based for loop. If we’d explicitly specified the element type as `std::string_view`, then when the array was later updated to `std::string`, the `std::string` elements will implicitly convert to `std::string_view`, which is no problem. If the array is updated to some other type that is not convertible, the compiler will error, and we can figure out what the appropriate thing to do is at that point.
- Always use `const auto&` instead of `auto` when using type deduction in your range-based for loop when you don’t want to work with copies. The performance penalty of accessing elements through a reference instead of by value is likely to be small, and this insulates us from potentially significant performance penalties down the road if the element type is later changed to something that is expensive to copy.

# Range-based for loops and other standard container types

Range-based for loops work with a wide variety of array types, including (non-decayed) C-style arrays, `std::array`, `std::vector`, linked list, trees, and maps. We haven’t covered any of these yet, so don’t worry if you don’t know what these are. Just remember that _range-based for_ loops provide a flexible and generic way to iterate through more than just `std::vector`:

```cpp
std::array fibonacci{ 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89 }; // note use of std::array here

    for (auto number : fibonacci)
    {
        std::cout << number << ' ';
    }
```

# Getting the index of the current element

Range-based for loops do _not_ provide a direct way to get the array index of the current element. This is because many of the structures that a range-based for loop can iterate over (such as `std::list`) do not support indices.

However, because range-based for loops always iterate in a forwards direction and don’t skip elements, you can always declare (and increment) your own counter. However, if you’re going to do this, you should consider whether you’re better off using a normal for-loop instead of a range-based for loop.

# Range-based for loops in reverse

As of C++20, you can use the `std::views::reverse` capability of the Ranges library to create a reverse view of the elements that can be traversed:

```cpp
#include <ranges>
for (const auto& word : std::views::reverse(words)) // create a reverse view
        std::cout << word << ' ';
```