# Using unscoped enumerators for indexing

We spent a lot of time discussing how the index of `std::vector<T>::operator[]` (and the other C++ container classes that can be subscripted) has type `size_type`, which is generally an alias for `std::size_t`. Therefore, our indices either need to be of type `std::size_t`, or a type that converts to `std::size_t`.

Since unscoped enumerations will implicitly convert to a `std::size_t`, this means we can use unscoped enumerations as array indices to help document the meaning of the index:

```cpp
#include <vector>

namespace Students
{
    enum Names
    {
        kenny, // 0
        kyle, // 1
        stan, // 2
        butters, // 3
        cartman, // 4
        max_students // 5
    };
}

int main()
{
    std::vector testScores { 78, 94, 66, 77, 14 };

    testScores[Students::stan] = 76; // we are now updating the test score belonging to stan

    return 0;
}
```

In this way, it’s much clearer what each of the array elements represents.

Because enumerators are implicitly constexpr, conversion of an enumerator to an unsigned integral type is not considered a narrowing conversion, thus avoiding signed/unsigned indexing problems.

# Using a non-constexpr unscoped enumeration for indexing

The underlying type of an unscoped enumeration is implementation defined (and thus, could be either a signed or unsigned integral type). Because enumerators are implicitly constexpr, as long as we stick to indexing with unscoped enumerators, we won’t run into sign conversion issues.

However, if we define a non-constexpr variable of the enumeration type, and then try to index our `std::vector` with that, we may get sign conversion warnings on any platform that defaults unscoped enumerations to a signed type:

```cpp
 std::vector testScores { 78, 94, 66, 77, 14 };
    Students::Names name { Students::stan }; // non-constexpr

    testScores[name] = 76; // may trigger a sign conversion warning if Student::Names defaults to a signed underlying type
```

While we could make `name` constexpr (so that the conversion from a constexpr signed integral type to `std::size_t` is non-narrowing), there’s a better way. Instead, we can explicitly specify the underlying type of the enumeration to be an unsigned int:

```cpp
namespace Students
{
    enum Names : unsigned int // explicitly specifies the underlying type is unsigned int
    {
        kenny, // 0
        kyle, // 1
        stan, // 2
        butters, // 3
        cartman, // 4
        max_students // 5
    };
}

int main()
{
    std::vector testScores { 78, 94, 66, 77, 14 };
    Students::Names name { Students::stan }; // non-constexpr

    testScores[name] = 76; // not a sign conversion since name is unsigned
    retun 0;
}
```

# Using a count enumerator

This count enumerator can then be used anywhere we need a count of the prior enumerators. For example:

```cpp
namespace Students
{
    enum Names
    {
        kenny, // 0
        kyle, // 1
        stan, // 2
        butters, // 3
        cartman, // 4
        // add future enumerators here
        max_students // 5
    };
}
```

This technique is also nice because if another enumerator is added later (just before `max_students`), then `max_students` will automatically become one larger, and all our arrays using `max_students` will update to use the new length without further modification.

# Asserting on array length with a count enumerator

More often, we’re creating an array using an initializer list of values, with the intent of indexing that array with enumerators. In such cases, it can be useful to assert that the size of the container equals our count enumerator. If this assert triggers, then either our enumerator list is incorrect somehow, or we have provided the wrong number of initializers. This can easily happen when a new enumerator is added to the enumeration, but a new initialization value is not added to the array.

```cpp
std::vector testScores { 78, 94, 66, 77, 14 };

    // Ensure the number of test scores is the same as the number of students
    assert(std::size(testScores) == max_students);
```

# Arrays and enum classes

Because unscoped enumerations pollute the namespace they are defined in with their enumerators, it is preferable to use enum classes in cases where the enum is not already contained in another scope region (e.g. a namespace or class).

However, because enum classes don’t have an implicit conversion to integral types, we run into a problem when we try to use their enumerators as array indices.

There are a couple of ways to address this. Most obviously, we can `static_cast` the enumerator to an integer.

A better option is to use the helper function which allows us to convert the enumerators of enum classes to integral values using unary `operator+`.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <type_traits> // for std::underlying_type_t
#include <vector>

enum class StudentNames
{
    kenny, // 0
    kyle, // 1
    stan, // 2
    butters, // 3
    cartman, // 4
    max_students // 5
};

// Overload the unary + operator to convert StudentNames to the underlying type
constexpr auto operator+(StudentNames a) noexcept
{
    return static_cast<std::underlying_type_t<StudentNames>>(a);
}

int main()
{
    std::vector<int> testScores(+StudentNames::max_students);

    testScores[+StudentNames::stan] = 76;

    std::cout << "The class has " << +StudentNames::max_students << " students\n";

    return 0;
}
```

However, if you’re going to be doing a lot of enumerator to integral conversions, it’s probably better to just use a standard enum inside a namespace (or class).
