A **function** is a reusable sequence of statements designed to do a particular job.
Functions that you write yourself are called **user-defined functions**.

A program will be executing statements sequentially inside one function when it encounters a function call. A **function call** is an expression that tells the CPU to interrupt the current function and execute another function. The CPU “puts a bookmark” at the current point of execution, and then **calls** (executes) the function named in the function call. When the called function ends, the CPU returns back to the point it bookmarked, and resumes execution.
The function initiating the function call is the **caller**, and the function being called is the **callee** or **called** function.

#Syntax 
```cpp
returnType functionName() // This is the function header (tells the compiler about the existence of the function)
{
    // This is the function body (tells the compiler what the function does)
}
```

## Return Values

When you write a user-defined function, you get to determine whether your function will return a value back to the caller or not. 

A function that returns a value is called a **value-returning function**. A function is value-returning if the return type is anything other than `void`.

To return a value back to the caller, two things are needed.

- First, your function has to indicate what type of value will be returned. This is done by setting the function’s **return type**, which is the type that is defined before the function’s name.
- Second, inside the function that will return a value, we use a **return statement** to indicate the specific value being returned to the caller. The specific value returned from a function is called the **return value**. When the return statement is executed, the function exits immediately, and the return value is copied from the function back to the caller. This process is called **return by value**.

# Revisiting main() 

You now have the conceptual tools to understand how the `main` function actually works. When the program is executed, the operating system makes a function call to `main`. Execution then jumps to the top of `main`. The statements in `main` are executed sequentially. Finally, `main` returns an integer value (usually `0`), and your program terminates. The return value from `main` is sometimes called a **status code** (also sometimes called an **exit code**, or rarely a **return code**), as it is used to indicate whether the program ran successfully or not.

By definition, a status code of `0` means the program executed successfully.

#Advance 
	[[C++/EXTRA#Status Code|Status Code]]

#IMP 
	C++ disallows calling the `main()` function explicitly.
	C does allow `main()` to be called explicitly, so some C++ compilers will allow this for compatibility reasons.

# 
## A value-returning function that does not return a value will produce [[5. Uninitialized variables and undefined behavior#Undefined behavior|undefined behavior]]
A value-returning function _must_ return a value of that type (using a return statement), otherwise undefined behavior will result.

## Function main will implicitly return 0 if no return statement is provided
The only exception to the rule that a value-returning function must return a value via a return statement is for function `main()`. The function `main()` will implicitly return the value `0` if no return statement is provided.

## Functions can only return a single value
A value-returning function can only return a single value back to the caller each time it is called.

## The function author can decide what the return value means
The meaning of the value returned by a function is determined by the function’s author. Some functions use return values as status codes, to indicate whether they succeeded or failed. Other functions return a calculated or selected value. Other functions return nothing.

# Void Functions(non-value returning functions)

## Void functions don’t need a return statement
A void function will automatically return to the caller at the end of the function. No return statement is required.

A return statement (with no return value) can be used in a void function -- such a statement will cause the function to return to the caller at the point where the return statement is executed.

## Returning a value from a void function is a compile error

Trying to return a value from a non-value returning function will result in a compilation error:

```cpp
void printHi() // This function is non-value returning
{
    std::cout << "In printHi()" << '\n';

    return 5; // compile error: we're trying to return a value
}
```