# Introduction to function parameters and arguments
A **function parameter** is a variable used in the header of a function. Function parameters work almost identically to variables defined inside the function, but with one difference: they are initialized with a value provided by the caller of the function.

When a function is called, all of the parameters of the function are created as variables, and the value of each of the arguments is _copied_ into the matching parameter (using copy initialization). This process is called **pass by value**. Function parameters that utilize pass by value are called **value parameters**.

### Unreferenced parameters

In certain cases, you will encounter functions that have parameters that are not used in the body of the function. These are called **unreferenced parameters**.

```cpp
void doSomething(int count) // warning: unreferenced parameter count
{
    // This function used to do something with count but it is not used any longer
}

int main()
{
    doSomething(4);

    return 0;
}
```

In a function definition, the name of a function parameter is optional. Therefore, in cases where a function parameter needs to exist but is not used in the body of the function, you can simply omit the name. A parameter without a name is called an **unnamed parameter**:

```cpp
void doSomething(int) // ok: unnamed parameter will not generate warning
{
}
void doSomething(int /*count*/)
{
}
```

#  Introduction to local scope

## Local variables

Variables defined inside the body of a function are called **local variables**.
Function parameters are also considered to be local variables.

We discussed how a variable definition such as `int x;` causes the variable to be instantiated (created) when this statement is executed.
	 Function parameters are created and initialized when the function is entered, and variables within the function body are created and initialized at the point of definition.

Local variables are destroyed in the opposite order of creation at the end of the set of curly braces in which it is defined (or for a function parameter, at the end of the function).

An object’s **lifetime** is defined to be the time between its creation and destruction. Note that variable creation and destruction happen when the program is running (called runtime), not at compile time. Therefore, lifetime is a runtime property.

## Local scope

An identifier’s **scope** determines where the identifier can be seen and used within the source code. When an identifier can be seen and used, we say it is **in scope**. When an identifier can not be seen, we can not use it, and we say it is **out of scope**. Scope is a compile-time property, and trying to use an identifier when it is not in scope will result in a compile error.

### “Out of scope” vs “going out of scope”

An identifier is out of scope anywhere it cannot be accessed within the code.  

The term “going out of scope” is typically applied to objects rather than identifiers. We say an object goes out of scope at the end of the scope (the end curly brace) in which the object was instantiated.

A local variable’s lifetime ends at the point where it goes out of scope, so local variables are destroyed at this point.