A **forward declaration** allows us to tell the compiler about the existence of an identifier _before_ actually defining the identifier.

In the case of functions, this allows us to tell the compiler about the existence of a function before we define the function’s body. This way, when the compiler encounters a call to the function, it’ll understand that we’re making a function call, and can check to ensure we’re calling the function correctly, even if it doesn’t yet know how or where the function is defined.

To write a forward declaration for a function, we use a **function declaration** statement (also called a **function prototype**). The function declaration consists of the function’s return type, name, and parameter types, terminated with a semicolon. The names of the parameters can be optionally included. The function body is not included in the declaration.

#Syntax 
```cpp
int add(int x, int y); // function declaration includes return type, name, parameters, and semicolon.  No function body!
```

## Declarations vs. definitions

A **declaration** tells the _compiler_ about the _existence_ of an identifier and its associated type information.

```cpp
int add(int x, int y); // tells the compiler about a function named "add" that takes two int parameters and returns an int.  No body!
int x;                 // tells the compiler about an integer variable named x
```

A **definition** is a declaration that actually implements (for functions and types) or instantiates (for variables) the identifier.

```cpp
int add(int x, int y) // implements function add()
{
    int z{ x + y };   // instantiates variable z

    return z;
}

int x;                // instantiates variable x
```


>All definitions are declarations. Therefore `int x;` is both a definition and a declaration.
>
>Conversely, not all declarations are definitions. Declarations that aren’t definitions are called **pure declarations**. Types of pure declarations include forward declarations for function, variables, and types.

| Term             | Meaning                                                                              | Examples                                                             |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Definition       | Implements a function or instantiates a variable. Definitions are also declarations. | void foo() { } // function definition  int x; // variable definition |
| Declaration      | Tells compiler about an identifier and its associated type information.              | void foo(); // function declaration int x; // variable declaration   |
| Pure declaration | A declaration that isn’t a definition.                                               | void foo();                                                          |
| Initializer      | Provides an initial value for a defined object.                                      | int x { 2 }; // 2 is the initializer                                 |


## ODR(One Definition Rule)

The **one definition rule** (or ODR for short) is a well-known rule in C++. The ODR has three parts:

- Within a _file_, each function, variable, type, or template can only have one definition. Definitions occurring in different scopes (e.g. local variables defined inside different functions, or functions defined inside different namespaces) do not violate this rule.
- Within a _program_, each function or variable can only have one definition. This rule exists because programs can have more than one file. Functions and variables not visible to the linker are excluded from this rule 
- Types, templates, inline functions, and inline variables are allowed to have duplicate definitions in different files, so long as each definition is identical.

Violating part 1 of the ODR will cause the compiler to issue a redefinition error. 
Violating ODR part 2 will cause the linker to issue a redefinition error. 
Violating ODR part 3 will cause undefined behavior.
