
Remember, the compiler compiles each file individually. It does not know about the contents of other code files, or remember anything it has seen from previously compiled code files. So even though the compiler may have seen the definition of function _add_ previously (if it compiled _add.cpp_ first), it doesn’t remember.

This limited visibility and short memory is intentional, for a few reasons:

1. It allows the source files of a project to be compiled in any order.
2. When we change a source file, only that source file needs to be recompiled.
3. It reduces the possibility of naming conflicts between identifiers in different files.

Our options for a solution here are the same as before satisfy the compiler with a forward declaration. In this case.

#
When an identifier is used in an expression, the identifier must be connected to its definition.

- If the compiler has not yet seen either a forward declaration nor a definition for the identifier in the file being compiled, it will error at the point where the identifier is used.
- Otherwise, if a definition exists in the same file, the compiler will connect the use of the identifier to its definition.
- Otherwise, if a definition exists in a different file (and is visible to the linker), the linker will connect the use of the identifier to its definition.
- Otherwise, the linker will issue an error indicating that it couldn’t find a definition for the identifier.

# Something went wrong

There are plenty of things that can go wrong the first time you try to work with multiple files. If you tried the above example and ran into an error, check the following:

1. If you get a compiler error about _add_ not being defined in _main_, you probably forgot the forward declaration for function _add_ in _main.cpp_.
2. If you get a linker error about _add_ not being defined, e.g.

`unresolved external symbol "int __cdecl add(int,int)" (?add@@YAHHH@Z) referenced in function _main
.
	 1. …the most likely reason is that _add.cpp_ is not added to your project correctly. When you compile, you should see the compiler list both _main.cpp_ and _add.cpp_. If you only see _main.cpp_, then _add.cpp_ definitely isn’t getting compiled. If you’re using Visual Studio or Code::Blocks, you should see _add.cpp_ listed in the Solution Explorer/project pane on the left or right side of the IDE. If you don’t, right click on your project, and add the file, then try compiling again. If you’re compiling on the command line, don’t forget to include both _main.cpp_ and _add.cpp_ in your compile command.
	 .
	2. …it’s possible that you added _add.cpp_ to the wrong project.
	.
	3. …it’s possible that the file is set to not compile or link. Check the file properties and ensure the file is configured to be compiled/linked. In Code::Blocks, compile and link are separate checkboxes that should be checked. In Visual Studio, there’s an “exclude from build” option that should be set to “no” or left blank.

3. Do _not_ _\#include “add.cpp”_ from _main.cpp_. This will cause the preprocessor to insert the contents of _add.cpp_ directly into _main.cpp_ instead of treating them as separate files.