# Naming Collision

C++ requires that all identifiers be non-ambiguous. If two identical identifiers are introduced into the same program in a way that the compiler or linker can’t tell them apart, the compiler or linker will produce an error. This error is generally referred to as a **naming collision** (or **naming conflict**).

If the colliding identifiers are introduced into the same file, the result will be a compiler error. If the colliding identifiers are introduced into separate files belonging to the same program, the result will be a linker error.


Most naming collisions occur in two cases:
	1. Two (or more) identically named functions (or global variables) are introduced into separate files belonging to the same program. This will result in a linker error, as shown above.
	2. Two (or more) identically named functions (or global variables) are introduced into the same file. This will result in a compiler error.

# Namespaces

A **namespace** is a region that allows you to declare names inside of it for the purpose of disambiguation. The namespace provides a scope region (called **namespace scope**) to the names declared inside of it -- which simply means that any name declared inside the namespace won’t be mistaken for identical names in other scopes.

Namespaces are often used to group related identifiers in a large project to help ensure they don’t inadvertently collide with other identifiers. For example, if you put all your math functions in a namespace called _math_, then your math functions won’t collide with identically named functions outside the _math_ namespace.

## The global namespace

In C++, any name that is not defined inside a class, function, or a namespace is considered to be part of an implicitly defined namespace called the **global namespace** (sometimes also called **the global scope**). 


Only declarations and definitions can appear in a namespace.

## The std namespace

It turns out that _std::cout_‘s name isn’t really _std::cout_. It’s actually just _cout_, and _std_ is the name of the namespace that identifier _cout_ is part of. Because _cout_ is defined in the _std_ namespace, the name _cout_ won’t conflict with any objects or functions named _cout_ that we create in the global namespace.

**When you use an identifier that is defined inside a namespace (such as the _std_ namespace), you have to tell the compiler that the identifier lives inside the namespace.**

### There are a few different ways to do this.
### Explicit namespace qualifier std::

The most straightforward way to tell the compiler that we want to use _cout_ from the _std_ namespace is by explicitly using the _std::_ prefix.

The :: symbol is an operator called the **scope resolution operator**. The identifier to the left of the :: symbol identifies the namespace that the name to the right of the :: symbol is contained within. If no identifier to the left of the :: symbol is provided, the global namespace is assumed.

When an identifier includes a namespace prefix, the identifier is called a **qualified name**.

### Using namespace std (and why to avoid it)

Another way to access identifiers inside a namespace is to use a _using directive_ statement.
Example
```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std; // this is a using directive that allows us to access names in the std namespace with no namespace prefix

int main()
{
    cout << "Hello world!";
    return 0;
}
```

A **using directive** allows us to access the names in a namespace without using a namespace prefix.

#### Avoid It
Consider the following program:
```cpp
#include <iostream> // imports the declaration of std::cout

using namespace std; // makes std::cout accessible as "cout"

int cout() // defines our own "cout" function in the global namespace
{
    return 5;
}

int main()
{
    cout << "Hello, world!"; // Compile error!  Which cout do we want here?  The one in the std namespace or the one we defined above?

    return 0;
}
```

When using a using-directive in this manner, _any_ identifier we define may conflict with _any_ identically named identifier in the _std_ namespace. Even worse, while an identifier name may not conflict today, it may conflict with new identifiers added to the std namespace in future language revisions. This was the whole point of moving all of the identifiers in the standard library into the _std_ namespace in the first place!