
Prior to compilation, each code (.cpp) file goes through a **preprocessing** phase. 
In this phase, a program called the **preprocessor** makes various changes to the text of the code file. 
The preprocessor does not actually modify the original code files in any way -- rather, all changes made by the preprocessor happen either temporarily in-memory or using temporary files.

When the preprocessor has finished processing a code file, the result is called a **translation unit**. This translation unit is what is then compiled by the compiler.

# Preprocessor Directives

When the preprocessor runs, it scans through the code file (from top to bottom), looking for preprocessor directives.
**Preprocessor directives** (often just called _directives_) are instructions that start with a _#_ symbol and end with a newline (NOT a semicolon). 
These directives tell the preprocessor to perform certain text manipulation tasks

## Some of the most common preprocessor directives.

## \#Include

When you _\#include_ a file, the preprocessor replaces the \#include directive with the contents of the included file. The included contents are then preprocessed (which may result in additional \#includes being preprocessed recursively), then the rest of the file is preprocessed.

## Macro defines

The _\#define_ directive can be used to create a macro.
n C++, a **macro** is a rule that defines how input text is converted into replacement output text.

There are two basic types of macros: **_object-like macros_**, and **_function-like macros_.**

### Function-like
_Function-like macros_ act like functions, and serve a similar purpose. Their use is generally considered unsafe, and almost anything they can do can be done by a normal function.

### Object-like
_Object-like macros_ can be defined in one of two ways:

```cpp
#define identifier
#define identifier substitution_text
```

#### Object-like macros with substitution text

When the preprocessor encounters this directive, any further occurrence of the identifier is replaced by _substitution_text_. The identifier is traditionally typed in all capital letters, using underscores to represent spaces.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

#define MY_NAME "Alex"

int main()
{
    std::cout << "My name is: " << MY_NAME << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

#### Object-like macros without substitution text

Object-like macros without substitution text. Any further occurrence of the identifier is removed and replaced by nothing!
Example:
```cpp
#define USE_YEN
```

## Conditional compilation

The _conditional compilation_ preprocessor directives allow you to specify under what conditions something will or won’t compile.

The _\#ifdef_ preprocessor directive allows the preprocessor to check whether an identifier has been previously _\#define_d. If so, the code between the _\#ifdef_ and matching _\#endif_ is compiled. If not, the code is ignored.

_\#ifndef_ is the opposite of _\#ifdef_, in that it allows you to check whether an identifier has _NOT_ been _#define_d yet.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

#define PRINT_JOE

int main()
{
#ifdef PRINT_JOE
    std::cout << "Joe\n"; // will be compiled since PRINT_JOE is defined
#endif

#ifdef PRINT_BOB
    std::cout << "Steve\n"; // will be excluded since PRINT_BOB is not defined
#endif

#ifndef PRINT_BOB
    std::cout << "Bob\n"; // will be excluded since PRINT_BOB is not defined
#endif

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
Joe
Bob
```

>In place of `#ifdef PRINT_BOB` and `#ifndef PRINT_BOB`, you’ll also see `#if defined(PRINT_BOB)` and `#if !defined(PRINT_BOB)`. These do the same, but use a slightly more C++-style syntax.
### \#if0

One more common use of conditional compilation involves using _\#if 0_ to exclude a block of code from being compiled (as if it were inside a comment block).

This provides a convenient way to “comment out” code that contains multi-line comments (which can’t be commented out using another multi-line comment due to multi-line comments being non-nestable).

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Joe\n";

#if 0 // Don't compile anything starting here
    std::cout << "Bob\n";
    std::cout << "Steve\n";
#endif // until this point

    return 0;
}
```

The above code only prints “Joe”, because “Bob” and “Steve” are excluded from compilation by the _\#if 0_ preprocessor directive.

>To temporarily re-enable code that has been wrapped in an `#if 0`, you can change the `#if 0` to `#if 1`:


## Object-like macros don’t affect other preprocessor directives

Macros only cause text substitution for non-preprocessor commands.

## The scope of \#defines

Directives are resolved before compilation, from top to bottom on a file-by-file basis.

Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void foo()
{
#define MY_NAME "Alex"
}

int main()
{
	std::cout << "My name is: " << MY_NAME << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

Even though it looks like _\#define MY_NAME “Alex”_ is defined inside function _foo_, the preprocessor won’t notice, as it doesn’t understand C++ concepts like functions. Therefore, this program behaves identically to one where _\#define MY_NAME “Alex”_ was defined either before or immediately after function _foo_.

Once the preprocessor has finished, all defined identifiers from that file are discarded. This means that directives are only valid from the point of definition to the end of the file in which they are defined. Directives defined in one code file do not have impact on other code files in the same project.