C++ code files (with a .cpp extension) are not the only files commonly seen in C++ programs. The other type of file is called a **header file**. Header files usually have a .h extension, but you will occasionally see them with a .hpp extension or no extension at all. The primary purpose of a header file is to propagate declarations to code (.cpp) files.

Header files allow us to put declarations in one location and then import them wherever we need them. This can save a lot of typing in multi-file programs.

Let’s write a header file to relieve us of this burden. Writing a header file is surprisingly easy, as header files only consist of two parts:

1. A _header guard_,
2. The actual content of the header file, which should be the forward declarations for all of the identifiers we want other files to be able to see.

## Do not put function and variable definitions in your header files (for now).

Defining either of these in a header file will likely result in a violation of the one-definition rule (ODR) if that header is then \#included into more than one source (.cpp) file.

## Source files should include their paired header 

In C++, it is a best practice for code files to \#include their paired header file (if one exists).

This allows the compiler to catch certain kinds of errors at compile time instead of link time. For example:

something.h:

```cpp
int something(int); // return type of forward declaration is int
```

something.cpp:

```cpp
#include "something.h"

void something(int) // error: wrong return type
{
}
```

Because _something.cpp_ \#includes _something.h_, the compiler will notice that function _something()_ has a mismatched return type and give us a compile error. If _something.cpp_ did not \#include _something.h_, we’d have to wait until the linker discovered the discrepancy, which wastes time.

## Do not \#include .cpp files

Although the preprocessor will happily do so, you should generally not `#include` .cpp files. These should be added to your project and compiled.

There are number of reasons for this:

- Doing so can cause naming collisions between source files.
- In a large project it can be hard to avoid one definition rules (ODR) issues.
- Any change to such a .cpp file will cause both the .cpp file and any other .cpp file that includes it to recompile, which can take a long time. Headers tend to change less often than source files.
- It is non-conventional to do so.

# Angled brackets vs double quotes 

You’re probably curious why we use angled brackets for `iostream`, and double quotes for `add.h`. It’s possible that a header file with the same filename might exist in multiple directories. Our use of angled brackets vs double quotes helps give the preprocessor a clue as to where it should look for header files.

When we use angled brackets, we’re telling the preprocessor that this is a header file we didn’t write ourselves. The preprocessor will search for the header only in the directories specified by the `include directories`. The `include directories` are configured as part of your project/IDE settings/compiler settings, and typically default to the directories containing the header files that come with your compiler and/or OS. The preprocessor will not search for the header file in your project’s source code directory.

When we use double-quotes, we’re telling the preprocessor that this is a header file that we wrote. The preprocessor will first search for the header file in the current directory. If it can’t find a matching header there, it will then search the `include directories`.

==**Use double quotes to include header files that you’ve written or are expected to be found in the current directory. Use angled brackets to include headers that come with your compiler, OS, or third-party libraries you’ve installed elsewhere on your system.**==

# Including header files from other directories
##
One (bad) way to do this is to include a relative path to the header file you want to include as part of the \#include line. For example:

```cpp
#include "headers/myHeader.h"
#include "../moreHeaders/myOtherHeader.h"
```

While this will compile (assuming the files exist in those relative directories), the downside of this approach is that it requires you to reflect your directory structure in your code. If you ever update your directory structure, your code won’t work anymore.

##
A better method is to tell your compiler or IDE that you have a bunch of header files in some other location, so that it will look there when it can’t find them in the current directory. This can generally be done by setting an _include path_ or _search directory_ in your IDE project settings.

# Headers may include other headers 

When your code file \#includes the first header file, you’ll also get any other header files that the first header file includes (and any header files those include, and so on). These additional header files are sometimes called **transitive includes**, as they’re included implicitly rather than explicitly.

You generally should not rely on the content of headers that are included transitively.
Each file should explicitly \#include all of the header files it needs to compile. Do not rely on headers included transitively from other headers.

# The \#include order of header files

If your header files are written properly and \#include everything they need, the order of inclusion shouldn’t matter.

Now consider the following scenario: let’s say header A needs declarations from header B, but forgets to include it. In our code file, if we include header B before header A, our code will still compile! This is because the compiler will compile all the declarations from B before it compiles the code from A that depends on those declarations.

However, if we include header A first, then the compiler will complain because the code from A will be compiled before the compiler has seen the declarations from B. This is actually preferable, because the error has been surfaced, and we can then fix it.
.
	To maximize the chance that missing includes will be flagged by compiler, order your \#includes as follows:
	1. The paired header file
	2. Other headers from your project
	3. 3rd party library headers
	4. Standard library headers

# Header file best practices

Here are a few more recommendations for creating and using header files.

- Always include header guards .
- Do not define variables and functions in header files (for now).
- Give a header file the same name as the source file it’s associated with (e.g. `grades.h` is paired with `grades.cpp`).
- Each header file should have a specific job, and be as independent as possible. For example, you might put all your declarations related to functionality A in A.h and all your declarations related to functionality B in B.h. That way if you only care about A later, you can just include A.h and not get any of the stuff related to B.
- Be mindful of which headers you need to explicitly include for the functionality that you are using in your code files, to avoid inadvertent transitive includes.
- A header file should \#include any other headers containing functionality it needs. Such a header should compile successfully when \#included into a .cpp file by itself.
- Only \#include what you need (don’t include everything just because you can).
- Do not \#include .cpp files.
- Prefer putting documentation on what something does or how to use it in the header. It’s more likely to be seen there. Documentation describing how something works should remain in the source files.

---
[[C++/EXTRA#Why doesn’t iostream have a .h extension?|Why doesn’t iostream have a .h extension?]]
