We noted that a variable or function identifier can only have one definition (the one definition rule). Thus, a program that defines a variable identifier more than once will cause a compile error.

While these programs are easy to fix (remove the duplicate definition), with header files, it’s quite easy to end up in a situation where a definition in a header file gets included more than once. This can happen when a header file \#includes another header file (which is common).

We can avoid the above problem via a mechanism called a **header guard** (also called an **include guard**). Header guards are conditional compilation directives that take the following form:

```cpp
#ifndef SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE
#define SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE

// your declarations (and certain types of definitions) here

#endif
```

When this header is \#included, the preprocessor checks whether _SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE_ has been previously defined. If this is the first time we’re including the header, _SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE_ will not have been defined. Consequently, it \#defines _SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE_ and includes the contents of the file. If the header is included again into the same file, _SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE_ will already have been defined from the first time the contents of the header were included, and the contents of the header will be ignored (thanks to the \#ifndef).

All of your header files should have header guards on them. _SOME_UNIQUE_NAME_HERE_ can be any name you want, but by convention is set to the full filename of the header file, typed in all caps, using underscores for spaces or punctuation.

# Header guards do not prevent a header from being included once into different code files

Note that the goal of header guards is to prevent a code file from receiving more than one copy of a guarded header. By design, header guards do _not_ prevent a given header file from being included (once) into separate code files.

## Can’t we just avoid definitions in header files?

There are quite a few cases we’ll show you in the future where it’s necessary to put non-function definitions in a header file. For example, C++ will let you create your own types. These custom types are typically defined in header files, so the type definitions can be propagated out to the code files that need to use them. Without a header guard, a code file could end up with multiple (identical) copies of a given type definition, which the compiler will flag as an error.

# \#pragma once

Modern compilers support a simpler, alternate form of header guards using the `#pragma` preprocessor directive:

```cpp
#pragma once

// your code here
```


`#pragma once` serves the same purpose as header guards: to avoid a header file from being included multiple times. With traditional header guards, the developer is responsible for guarding the header (by using preprocessor directives `#ifndef`, `#define`, and `#endif`). With `#pragma once`, we’re requesting that the compiler guard the header.