# Unary arithmetic operators

There are two unary arithmetic operators, plus (+), and minus (-). As a reminder, unary operators are operators that only take one operand.

|Operator|Symbol|Form|Operation|
|---|---|---|---|
|Unary plus|+|+x|Value of x|
|Unary minus|-|-x|Negation of x|

The **unary minus** operator returns the operand multiplied by -1. In other words, if x = 5, -x is -5.

The **unary plus** operator returns the value of the operand. In other words, +5 is 5, and +x is x.

# Binary arithmetic operators

Here are 5 binary arithmetic operators. Binary operators are operators that take a left and right operand.

| Operator       | Symbol | Form  | Operation                       |
| -------------- | ------ | ----- | ------------------------------- |
| Addition       | +      | x + y | x plus y                        |
| Subtraction    | -      | x - y | x minus y                       |
| Multiplication | *      | x * y | x multiplied by y               |
| Division       | /      | x / y | x divided by y                  |
| Remainder      | %      | x % y | The remainder of x divided by y |

## Integer and floating point division

It is easiest to think of the division operator as having two different “modes”.

If either (or both) of the operands are floating point values, the _division operator_ performs floating point division. **Floating point division** returns a floating point value, and the fraction is kept. For example, `7.0 / 4 = 1.75`, `7 / 4.0 = 1.75`, and `7.0 / 4.0 = 1.75`. As with all floating point arithmetic operations, rounding errors may occur.

If both of the operands are integers, the _division operator_ performs integer division instead. **Integer division** drops any fractions and returns an integer value. For example, `7 / 4 = 1` because the fractional portion of the result is dropped. Similarly, `-7 / 4 = -1` because the fraction is dropped.

### Using static_cast<> to do floating point division with integers

We can use _static_cast<>_ to convert an integer to a floating point number so that we can do _floating point division_ instead of _integer division_.

## Dividing by 0 and 0.0

Integer division with a divisor of `0` will cause undefined behavior, as the results are mathematically undefined!

The result of dividing by floating point value `0.0` is implementation-defined (meaning the behavior is determined by the compiler/architecture). On architectures that support IEEE754 floating point format, the result will be `NaN` or `Inf`. On other architectures, the result will likely be undefined behavior.

# Arithmetic assignment operators

| Operator                  | Symbol | Form   | Operation                       |
| ------------------------- | ------ | ------ | ------------------------------- |
| Assignment                | =      | x = y  | Assign value y to x             |
| Addition assignment       | +=     | x += y | Add y to x                      |
| Subtraction assignment    | -=     | x -= y | Subtract y from x               |
| Multiplication assignment | *=     | x *= y | Multiply x by y                 |
| Division assignment       | /=     | x /= y | Divide x by y                   |
| Remainder assignment      | %=     | x %= y | Put the remainder of x / y in x |