A **recursive function** in C++ is a function that calls itself.

>A **tail call** is a function call that occurs at the tail (end) of a function. Functions with recursive tail calls are fairly easy for the compiler to optimize into an iterative (non-recursive) function. Such a function would not cause the system to run out of stack space in the above example.

# **Recursive termination conditions**

A **recursive termination** is a condition that, when met, will cause the recursive function to stop calling itself.

Recursive termination generally involves using an if statement.

# **Recursive algorithms**

Recursive functions typically solve a problem by first finding the solution to a subset of the problem (recursively), and then modifying that sub-solution to get to a solution.

In many recursive algorithms, some inputs produce trivial outputs (you can calculate this in your head). Inputs for which an algorithm trivially produces an output is called a **base case**. Base cases act as termination conditions for the algorithm. Base cases can often be identified by considering the output for an input of 0, 1, “”, ”, or null.

# **Fibonacci numbers**

One of the most famous mathematical recursive algorithms is the Fibonacci sequence.

Fibonacci numbers are defined mathematically as:

|   |   |
|---|---|
|F(n) =|0 if n = 0  <br>1 if n = 1  <br>f(n-1) + f(n-2) if n > 1|

Consequently, it’s rather simple to write a (not very efficient) recursive function to calculate the nth Fibonacci number:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int fibonacci(int count)
{
    if (count == 0)
        return 0; // base case (termination condition)
    if (count == 1)
        return 1; // base case (termination condition)
    return fibonacci(count-1) + fibonacci(count-2);
}

// And a main program to display the first 13 Fibonacci numbers
int main()
{
    for (int count { 0 }; count < 13; ++count)
        std::cout << fibonacci(count) << ' ';

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89 144
```

# **Memoization algorithms**

The above recursive Fibonacci algorithm isn’t very efficient, in part because each call to a Fibonacci non-base case results in two more Fibonacci calls. This produces an exponential number of function calls (in fact, the above example calls fibonacci() 1205 times!). There are techniques that can be used to reduce the number of calls necessary. One technique, called **memoization**, caches the results of expensive function calls so the result can be returned when the same input occurs again.

Here’s a memoized version of the recursive Fibonacci algorithm:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

// h/t to potterman28wxcv for a variant of this code
// count is now a std::size_t to make indexing the std::vector easier
int fibonacci(std::size_t count)
{
	// We'll use a static std::vector to cache calculated results
	static std::vector results{ 0, 1 };

	// If we've already seen this count, then use the cache'd result
	if (count < std::size(results))
		return results[count];

	// Otherwise calculate the new result and add it
	results.push_back(fibonacci(count - 1) + fibonacci(count - 2));
	return results[count];
}

// And a main program to display the first 13 Fibonacci numbers
int main()
{
	for (int count { 0 }; count < 13; ++count)
		std::cout << fibonacci(static_cast<std::size_t>(count)) << ' ';

	return 0;
}
```

This memoized version makes 35 function calls, which is much better than the 1205 of the original algorithm.

# **Recursive vs iterative**

It turns out that you can always solve a recursive problem iteratively -- however, for non-trivial problems, the recursive version is often much simpler to write (and read).

Iterative functions (those using a for-loop or while-loop) are almost always more efficient than their recursive counterparts. This is because every time you call a function there is some amount of overhead that takes place in pushing and popping stack frames. Iterative functions avoid this overhead.

That’s not to say iterative functions are always a better choice. Sometimes the recursive implementation of a function is so much cleaner and easier to follow that incurring a little extra overhead is more than worth it for the benefit in maintainability, particularly if the algorithm doesn’t need to recurse too many times to find a solution.

In general, recursion is a good choice when most of the following are true:

- The recursive code is much simpler to implement.
- The recursion depth can be limited (e.g. there’s no way to provide an input that will cause it to recurse down 100,000 levels).
- The iterative version of the algorithm requires managing a stack of data.
- This isn’t a performance-critical section of code.