# Defining C-style strings

To define a C-style string variable, simply declare a C-style array variable of `char` (or `const char` / `constexpr char`):

```cpp
char str1[8]{};                    // an array of 8 char, indices 0 through 7

const char str2[]{ "string" };     // an array of 7 char, indices 0 through 6
constexpr char str3[] { "hello" }; // an array of 6 const char, indices 0 through 5
```

# C-style strings will decay

Because C-style strings are C-style arrays, they will decay -- C-style string literals decay into a `const char*`, and C-style string arrays decay into either a `const char*` or `char*` depending on whether the array is const. And when a C-style string decays into a pointer, the length of the string (encoded in the type information) is lost.

# Outputting a C-style string

When outputting a C-style string, `std::cout` outputs characters until it encounters the null terminator. This null terminator marks the end of the string, so that decayed strings (which have lost their length information) can still be printed.

```cpp
char str[]{ "string" };
    std::cout << str << '\n'; // outputs string
```

# Inputting C-style strings

Because C-style strings are fixed-size arrays, the solution is to declare an array larger than we are ever likely to need:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    char rolls[255] {}; // declare array large enough to hold 254 characters + null terminator
    std::cout << "Enter your rolls: ";
    std::cin >> rolls;
    std::cout << "You entered: " << rolls << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

Prior to C++20, `std::cin >> rolls` would extract as many characters as possible to `rolls` (stopping at the first non-leading whitespace). Nothing is stopping the user from entering more than 254 characters (either unintentionally, or maliciously). And if that happens, the user’s input will overflow the `rolls` array and undefined behavior will result.

In C++20, `operator>>` was changed so that it only works for inputting non-decayed C-style strings. This allows `operator>>` to extract only as many characters as the C-style string’s length will allow, preventing overflow. But this also means you can no longer use `operator>>` to input to decayed C-style strings.

The recommended way of reading C-style strings using `std::cin` is as follows:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <iterator> // for std::size

int main()
{
    char rolls[255] {}; // declare array large enough to hold 254 characters + null terminator
    std::cout << "Enter your rolls: ";
    std::cin.getline(rolls, std::size(rolls));
    std::cout << "You entered: " << rolls << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

This call to `cin.getline()` will read up to 254 characters (including whitespace) into `rolls`. Any excess characters will be discarded. Because `getline()` takes a length, we can provide the maximum number of characters to accept. With a non-decayed array, this is easy -- we can use `std::size()` to get the array length. With a decayed array, we have to determine the length in some other way. And if we provide the wrong length, our program may malfunction or have security issues.

# Modifying C-style strings

One important point to note is that C-style strings follow the same rules as C-style arrays. This means you can initialize the string upon creation, but you can not assign values to it using the assignment operator after that!

```cpp
char str[]{ "string" }; // ok
str = "rope";           // not ok!
```

Since C-style strings are arrays, you can use the [] operator to change individual characters in the string.

# Getting the length of an C-style string

Because C-style strings are C-style arrays, you can use `std::size()` (or in C++20, `std::ssize()`) to get the length of the string as an array. There are two caveats here:

1. This doesn’t work on decayed strings.
2. Returns the actual length of the C-style array, not the length of the string.

```cpp
  char str[255]{ "string" }; // 6 characters + null terminator
    std::cout << "length = " << std::size(str) << '\n'; // prints length = 255

    char *ptr { str };
    std::cout << "length = " << std::size(ptr) << '\n'; // compile error
```

An alternate solution is to use the `strlen()` function, which lives in the `<cstring>` header. `strlen()` will work on decayed arrays, and returns the length of the string being held, excluding the null terminator:

```cpp
#include <cstring> // for std::strlen
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    char str[255]{ "string" }; // 6 characters + null terminator
    std::cout << "length = " << std::strlen(str) << '\n'; // prints length = 6

    char *ptr { str };
    std::cout << "length = " << std::strlen(ptr) << '\n';   // prints length = 6

    return 0;
}
```

# Other C-style string manipulating functions

The C language provides many functions for manipulating C-style strings. These functions have been inherited by C++ as part of the `<cstring>` header.

Here are a few of the most useful that you may see in older code:

- strlen() -- returns the length of a C-style string
- strcpy(), strncpy(), strcpy_s() -- overwrites one C-style string with another
- strcat(), strncat() -- Appends one C-style string to the end of another
- strcmp(), strncmp() -- Compares two C-style strings (returns `0` if equal)

Except for `strlen()`, we generally recommend avoiding these.

#  Avoid non-const C-style string objects

Unless you have a specific, compelling reason to use non-const C-style strings, they are best avoided, as they are awkward to work with and are prone to overruns, which will cause undefined behavior (and are potential security issues).

In the rare case that you do need to work with C-style strings or fixed buffer sizes (e.g. for memory-limited devices), we’d recommend using a well-tested 3rd party fixed-length string library designed for the purpose.