
We discussed how to create and initialize C-style string objects:

```cpp
char name[]{ "Alex" }; // C-style string
```

C++ supports two different ways to create C-style string symbolic constants:

```cpp
const char name[] { "Alex" };        // case 1: const C-style string initialized with C-style string literal
    const char* const color{ "Orange" }; // case 2: const pointer to C-style string literal
```

In case 1, “Alex” is put into (probably read-only) memory somewhere. Then the program allocates memory for a C-style array of length 5 (four explicit characters plus the null terminator), and initializes that memory with the string “Alex”. So we end up with 2 copies of “Alex” -- one in global memory somewhere, and the other owned by `name`. Since `name` is const (and will never be modified), making a copy is inefficient.

In case 2, how the compiler handles this is implementation defined. What _usually_ happens is that the compiler places the string “Orange” into read-only memory somewhere, and then initializes the pointer with the address of the string.

For optimization purposes, multiple string literals may be consolidated into a single value. For example:

```cpp
const char* name1{ "Alex" };
const char* name2{ "Alex" };
```

These are two different string literals with the same value. Because these literals are constants, the compiler may opt to save memory by combining these into a single shared string literal, with both `name1` and `name2` pointed at the same address.

# Type deduction with const C-style strings

Type deduction using a C-style string literal is fairly straightforward:

```cpp
auto s1{ "Alex" };  // type deduced as const char*
auto* s2{ "Alex" }; // type deduced as const char*
auto& s3{ "Alex" }; // type deduced as const char(&)[5]
```
#Doubt 
# Outputting pointers and C-style strings

You may have noticed something interesting about the way `std::cout` handles pointers of different types.

Consider the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int narr[]{ 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 };
    char carr[]{ "Hello!" };
    const char* ptr{ "Alex" };

    std::cout << narr << '\n'; // narr will decay to type int*
    std::cout << carr << '\n'; // carr will decay to type char*
    std::cout << ptr << '\n'; // name is already type char*

    return 0;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this printed:

```Output
003AF738
Hello!
Alex
```

The answer is that the output streams (e.g. `std::cout`) make some assumptions about your intent. If you pass it a non-char pointer, it will simply print the contents of that pointer (the address that the pointer is holding). However, if you pass it an object of type `char*` or `const char*`, it will assume you’re intending to print a string. Consequently, instead of printing the pointer’s value (an address), it will print the string being pointed to instead!

While this is desired most of the time, it can lead to unexpected results. Consider the following case:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    char c{ 'Q' };
    std::cout << &c;

    return 0;
}
```

In this case, the programmer is intending to print the address of variable `c`. However, `&c` has type `char*`, so `std::cout` tries to print this as a string! And because `c` is not null-terminated, we get undefined behavior.

On the author’s machine, this printed:

```Output
Q╠╠╠╠╜╡4;¿■A
```

If you actually want to print the address of a char pointer, static_cast it to type `const void*`:

```cpp
std::cout << ptr << '\n';                           // print ptr as C-style string
    std::cout << static_cast<const void*>(ptr) << '\n'; // print address held by ptr
```

# Favor std::string_view for C-style string symbolic constants

There is little reason to use C-style string symbolic constants in modern C++. Instead, favor `constexpr std::string_view` objects, which tend to be just as fast (if not faster) and behave more consistently.