
The **dimension** of an array is the number of indices needed to select an element. An array containing only a single dimension is called a **single-dimensional array** or a **one-dimensional array** (sometimes abbreviated as a **1d array**).

# Two-dimensional arrays

In previous lessons, we noted that the elements of an array can be of any object type. This means the element type of an array can be another array! Defining such an array is simple:

```cpp
int a[3][5]; // a 3-element array of 5-element arrays of int
```

An array of arrays is called a **two-dimensional array** (sometimes abbreviated as a **2d array**) because it has two subscripts.

With a two-dimensional array, it is convenient to think of the first (left) subscript as selecting the row, and the second (right) subscript as selecting the column. Conceptually, we can imagine this two-dimensional array laid out as follows:

```
// col 0    col 1    col 2    col 3    col 4
// a[0][0]  a[0][1]  a[0][2]  a[0][3]  a[0][4]  row 0
// a[1][0]  a[1][1]  a[1][2]  a[1][3]  a[1][4]  row 1
// a[2][0]  a[2][1]  a[2][2]  a[2][3]  a[2][4]  row 2
```

# Multidimensional arrays

Arrays with more than one dimension are called **multidimensional arrays**.

C++ even supports multidimensional arrays with more than 2 dimensions:

```cpp
int threedee[4][4][4]; // a 4x4x4 array (an array of 4 arrays of 4 arrays of 4 ints)
```

# How 2d arrays are laid out in memory

Memory is linear (1-dimensional), so multidimensional arrays are actually stored as a sequential list of elements.

There are two possible ways for the following array to be stored in memory:

```cpp
// col 0   col 1   col 2   col 3   col 4
// [0][0]  [0][1]  [0][2]  [0][3]  [0][4]  row 0
// [1][0]  [1][1]  [1][2]  [1][3]  [1][4]  row 1
// [2][0]  [2][1]  [2][2]  [2][3]  [2][4]  row 2
```

C++ uses **row-major order**, where elements are sequentially placed in memory row-by-row, ordered from left to right, top to bottom:

```
[0][0] [0][1] [0][2] [0][3] [0][4] [1][0] [1][1] [1][2] [1][3] [1][4] [2][0] [2][1] [2][2] [2][3] [2][4]
```

Some other languages (like Fortran) use **column-major order**, elements are sequentially placed in memory column-by-column, from top to bottom, left to right:

```
[0][0] [1][0] [2][0] [0][1] [1][1] [2][1] [0][2] [1][2] [2][2] [0][3] [1][3] [2][3] [0][4] [1][4] [2][4]
```

In C++, when initializing an array, elements are initialized in row-major order. And when traversing an array, it is most efficient to access elements in the order they are laid out in memory.

# Initializing two-dimensional arrays

To initialize a two-dimensional array, it is easiest to use nested braces, with each set of numbers representing a row:

```cpp
int array[3][5]
{
  { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 },     // row 0
  { 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 },    // row 1
  { 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 } // row 2
};
```

COPY

Although some compilers will let you omit the inner braces, we highly recommend you include them anyway for readability purposes.

When using inner braces, missing initializers will be value-initialized:

```cpp
int array[3][5]
{
  { 1, 2 },          // row 0 = 1, 2, 0, 0, 0
  { 6, 7, 8 },       // row 1 = 6, 7, 8, 0, 0
  { 11, 12, 13, 14 } // row 2 = 11, 12, 13, 14, 0
};
```

An initialized multidimensional array can omit (only) the leftmost length specification:

```cpp
int array[][5]
{
  { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 },
  { 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 },
  { 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 }
};
```

An initialized multidimensional array can omit (only) the leftmost length specification:

```cpp
int array[][5]
{
  { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 },
  { 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 },
  { 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 }
};
```

In such cases, the compiler can do the math to figure out what the leftmost length is from the number of initializers.

Omitting non-leftmost dimensions is not allowed:

```cpp
int array[][]
{
  { 1, 2, 3, 4 },
  { 5, 6, 7, 8 }
};
```

Just like normal arrays, multidimensional arrays can still be initialized to 0 as follows:

```cpp
int array[3][5] {};
```

# Two-dimensional arrays and loops

With a two-dimensional array, we need two loops: one to select the row, and another to select the column.

And with two loops, we also need to determine which loop will be the outer loop, and which will be the inner loop. It is most efficient to access elements in the order they are laid out in memory. Since C++ uses row-major order, the row selector should be the outer loop, and the column selector should be the inner loop.

[[C++/EXTRA#Cartesian coordinates vs Array indices]]

