An object of type `std::array` can be passed to a function just like any other object. That means if we pass a `std::array` by value, an expensive copy will be made. Therefore, we typically pass `std::array` by (const) reference to avoid such copies.

With a `std::array`, both the element type and array length are part of the type information of the object. Therefore, when we use a `std::array` as a function parameter, we have to explicitly specify both the element type and array length:

```cpp
void passByRef(const std::array<int, 5>& arr) // we must explicitly specify <int, 5> here
{
    std::cout << arr[0] << '\n';
}
```

# Using function templates to pass `std::array` of different element types or lengths

To write a function that can accept `std::array` with any kind of element type or any length, we can create a function template that parameterizes both the element type and length of our `std::array`, and then C++ will use that function template to instantiate real functions with actual types and lengths.

```cpp
template <typename T, std::size_t N> // note that this template parameter declaration matches the one for std::array
void passByRef(const std::array<T, N>& arr)
{
    std::cout << arr[0] << '\n';
}
```

If desired, it is also possible to only template one of the two template parameters. In the following example, we parameterize only the length of the `std::array`, but the element type is explicitly defined as `int`:

```cpp
template <std::size_t N> // note: only the length has been templated here
void passByRef(const std::array<int, N>& arr) // we've defined the element type as int
{
    std::cout << arr[0] << '\n';
}
```

# Auto non-type template parameters

In C++20, we can use `auto` in a template parameter declaration to have a non-type template parameter deduce its type from the argument:

```cpp
template <typename T, auto N> // now using auto to deduce type of N
void passByRef(const std::array<T, N>& arr)
{
    std::cout << arr[0] << '\n';
}
```

# Static asserting on array length

Consider the following template function, which is similar to the one presented above:

```cpp
template <typename T, std::size_t N>
void printElement3(const std::array<T, N>& arr)
{
    std::cout << arr[3] << '\n';
}
```

The above program prints the value of the array element with index 3. This is fine as long as the array has a valid element with index 3. However, the compiler will happily let you pass in arrays where index 3 is out of bounds.

One advantage that template parameters have over function parameters is that template parameters are compile-time constants. This means we can take advantage of capabilities that require constant expressions.

So one solution is to use `std::get()` (which does compile-time bounds checking) instead of `operator[]` (which does no bounds checking):

```cpp
template <typename T, std::size_t N>
void printElement3(const std::array<T, N>& arr)
{
    std::cout << std::get<3>(arr) << '\n'; // checks that index 3 is valid at compile-time
}
```

An alternative solution is to use `static_assert` to validate a precondition on the array length ourselves:

```cpp
template <typename T, std::size_t N>
void printElement3(const std::array<T, N>& arr)
{
    // precondition: array length must be greater than 3 so element 3 exists
    static_assert (N > 3);

    // we can assume the array length is greater than 3 beyond this point

    std::cout << arr[3] << '\n';
}
```

# Returning a `std::array`

 Unlike `std::vector`, `std::array` is not move-capable, so returning a `std::array` by value will make a copy of the array. The elements inside the array will be moved if they are move-capable, and copied otherwise.

There are two conventional options here, and which you should pick depends on circumstances.

## Returning a `std::array` by value

It is okay to return a `std:array` by value when all of the following are true:

- The array isn’t huge.
- The element type is cheap to copy (or move).
- The code isn’t being used in a performance-sensitive context.

There are a few nice things about this method:

- It uses the most conventional way to return data to the caller.
- It’s obvious that the function is returning a value.
- We can define an array and use the function to initialize it in a single statement.

There are also a few downsides:

- The function returns a copy of the array and all its elements, which isn’t cheap.
- When we call the function, we must explicitly supply the template arguments since there is no parameter to deduce them from.

## Returning a `std::array` via an out parameter

In cases where return by value is too expensive, we can use an out-parameter instead. In this case, the caller is responsible for passing in the `std::array` by non-const reference (or by address), and the function can then modify this array.

The primary advantage of this method is that no copy of the array is ever made, so this is efficient.

There are also a few downsides:

- This method of returning data is non-conventional, and it is not easy to tell that the function is modifying the argument.
- We can only use this method to assign values to the array, not initialize it.
- Such a function cannot be used to produce temporary objects.

## Returning a `std::vector` instead

`std::vector` is move-capable and can be returned by value without making expensive copies. If you’re returning a `std::array` by value, your `std::array` probably isn’t constexpr, and you should consider using (and returning) `std::vector` instead.