# Declaring a C-style array

Because they are part of the core language, C-style arrays have their own special declaration syntax. In an C-style array declaration, we use square brackets (`[]`) to tell the compiler that a declared object is a C-style array. Inside the square brackets, we can optionally provide the length of the array, which is an integral value of type `std::size_t` that tells the compiler how many elements are in the array.

# The array length of a c-style array must be a constant expression

Just like `std::array`, when declaring a C-style array, the length of the array must be a constant expression (of type `std::size_t`, though this typically doesn’t matter).

# Subscripting a C-style array

Just like with a `std::array`, C-style arrays can be indexed using the subscript operator (`operator[]`):

```cpp
    int arr[5]; // define an array of 5 int values

    arr[1] = 7; // use subscript operator to index array element 1
    std::cout << arr[1]; // prints 7
```

Unlike the standard library container classes (which use unsigned indices of type `std::size_t` only), the index of a C-style array can be a value of any integral type (signed or unsigned) or an unscoped enumeration. 
This means that C-style arrays are not subject to all of the sign conversion indexing issues that the standard library container classes have!

# Aggregate initialization of C-style arrays

Just like `std::array`, C-style arrays are aggregates, which means they can be initialized using aggregate initialization.

As a quick recap, aggregate initialization allows us to directly initialize the members of aggregates. To do this, we provide an initializer list, which is a brace-enclosed list of comma-separated initialization values.

```cpp
    int fibonnaci[6] = { 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5 }; // copy-list initialization using braced list
    int prime[5] { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };         // list initialization using braced list (preferred)
```

Each of these initialization forms initializes the array members in sequence, starting with element 0.

If you do not provide an initializer for a C-style array, the elements will be default initialized. In most cases, this will result in elements being left uninitialized. Because we generally want our elements to be initialized, C-style arrays should be value initialized (using empty braces) when defined with no initializers.

```cpp
int arr1[5];    // Members default initialized int elements are left uninitialized)
    int arr2[5] {}; // Members value initialized (int elements are zero uninitialized) (preferred)
```

If more initializers are provided in an initializer list than the defined array length, the compiler will error. If fewer initializers are provided in an initializer list than the defined array length, the remaining elements without initializers are value initialized:

```cpp
int a[4] { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }; // compile error: too many initializers
    int b[4] { 1, 2 };          // arr[2] and arr[3] are value initialized
```

One downside of using a C-style array is that the element’s type must be explicitly specified. CTAD doesn’t work because C-style arrays aren’t class templates. And using `auto` to try to deduce the element type of an array from the list of initializers doesn’t work either:

```cpp
auto squares[5] { 1, 4, 9, 16, 25 }; // compile error: can't use type deduction on C-style arrays
```

# Omitted length

When we initialize a C-style array with an initializer list, we can omit the length (in the array definition) and let the compiler deduce the length of the array from the number of initializers.

The following array definitions behave identically:

```cpp
const int prime1[5] { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 }; // prime1 explicitly defined to have length 5
    const int prime2[] { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };  // prime2 deduced by compiler to have length 5
```

This only works when initializers are explicitly provided for all array members.

```cpp
int bad[] {}; // error: the compiler will deduce this to be a zero-length array, which is disallowed!
```

# Const and constexpr C-style arrays 

Just like `std::array`, C-style arrays can be `const` or `constexpr`. Just like other const variables, const arrays must be initialized, and the value of the elements cannot be changed afterward.

```cpp
const int prime[5] { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 }; // an array of const int
    prime[0] = 17; // compile error: can't change const int
```

# The sizeof a C-style array

In previous lessons, we used the `sizeof()` operator to get the size of an object or type in bytes. Applied to a C-style array, `sizeof()` returns the number of bytes used by the entire array:

```cpp
std::cout << sizeof(prime); // prints 20 (assuming 4 byte ints)
```

# Getting the length of a C-style array

In C++17, we can use `std::size()` (defined in the \<iterator> header), which returns the array length as an unsigned integral value (of type `std::size_t`). In C++20, we can also use `std::ssize()`, which returns the array length as a signed integral value (of a large signed integral type, probably `std::ptrdiff_t`).

```cpp
 const int prime[] { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };   // the compiler will deduce prime to have length 5

    std::cout << std::size(prime) << '\n';  // C++17, returns unsigned integral value 5
    std::cout << std::ssize(prime) << '\n'; // C++20, returns signed integral value 5
```

# Getting the length of a C-style array (C++14 or older)

If you’re using C++11 or C++14, you can use this function instead:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

template <typename T, std::size_t N>
constexpr std::size_t length(const T(&)[N]) noexcept
{
	return N;
}

int main() {

	int array[]{ 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21 };
	std::cout << "The array has: " << length(array) << " elements\n";

	return 0;
}
```

This uses a function template that takes a C-style array by reference and then returns the non-type template parameter representing the array’s length.