Now consider the following program, which uses a 1000 element C-style int array instead of a single int:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printElementZero(int arr[1000])
{
    std::cout << arr[0]; // print the value of the first element
}

int main()
{
    int x[1000] { 5 };   // define an array with 1000 elements, x[0] is initialized to 5
    printElementZero(x);

    return 0;
}
```

First, copying a 1000 element array every time a function is called is expensive (and even more so if the elements are an expensive-to-copy type), so we want to avoid that. But how? C doesn’t have references, so using pass by reference to avoid making a copy of function arguments wasn’t an option.

Second, we want to be able to write a single function that can accept array arguments of different lengths. Ideally, our `printElementZero()` function in the example above should be callable with arrays arguments of any length (since element 0 is guaranteed to exist). We don’t want to have to write a different function for every possible array length that we want to use as an argument. But how? C has no syntax to specify “any length” arrays, nor does it support templates, nor can arrays of one length be converted to arrays of another length (presumably because doing so would involve making an expensive copy).

The designers of the C language came up with a clever solution (inherited by C++ for compatibility reasons) that solves for both of these issues:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printElementZero(int arr[1000]) // doesn't make a copy
{
    std::cout << arr[0]; // print the value of the first element
}

int main()
{
    int x[7] { 5 };      // define an array with 7 elements
    printElementZero(x); // somehow works!

    return 0;
}
```

# Array to pointer conversions (array decay)

In most cases, when a C-style array is used in an expression, the array will be implicitly converted into a pointer to the element type, initialized with the address of the first element (with index 0). Colloquially, this is called **array decay** (or just **decay** for short).

There is nothing special about the pointer that an array decays into. It is a normal pointer that holds the address of the first element.

Similarly, a const array (e.g. `const int arr[5]`) decays into a pointer-to-const (`const int*`).

The type information of an array and a decayed array is different. In the example above, the array `arr` has type `int[5]`, whereas the decayed array has type `int*`. Notably, the array type `int[5]` contains length information, whereas the decayed array pointer type `int*` does not.
# Subscripting a C-style array actually applies `operator[]` to the decayed pointer

Because a C-style arrays decays to a pointer when evaluated, when a C-style array is subscripted, the subscript is actually operating on the decayed array pointer:

```cpp
const int arr[] { 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 };
    std::cout << arr[2]; // subscript decayed array to get element 2, prints 5
```

We can also use `operator[]` directly on a pointer. If that pointer is holding the address of the first element, the result will be identical:

```cpp
const int* ptr{ arr };  // arr decays into a pointer
    std::cout << ptr[2];    // subscript ptr to get element 2, prints 5
```

# Array decay solves our C-style array passing issue

Array decay solves both challenges we encountered at the top of the lesson.

When passing a C-style array as an argument, the array decays into a pointer, and the pointer holding the address of the first element of the array is what gets passed to the function. So although it looks like we’re passing the C-style array by value, we’re actually passing it by address! This is how making a copy of the C-style array argument is avoided.

Now consider two different arrays of the same element type but different lengths (e.g. `int[5]` and `int[7]`). These are distinct types, incompatible with each other. However, they will both decay into the same pointer type (e.g. `int*`). Their decayed versions are interchangable! Dropping the length information from the type allows us to pass arrays of different lengths without a type mismatch.

In the following example, we’ll illustrate two things:

- That we can pass arrays of different lengths to a single function (because both decay to the same pointer type).
- That our function parameter receiving the array can be a (const) pointer of the array’s element type.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printElementZero(const int* arr) // pass by const address
{
    std::cout << arr[0];
}

int main()
{
    const int prime[] { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    const int squares[] { 1, 4, 9, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81 };

    printElementZero(prime);   // prime decays to an const int* pointer
    printElementZero(squares); // squares decays to an const int* pointer

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
2
1
```

# C-style array function parameter syntax

One problem with declaring the function parameter as `int* arr` is that it’s not obvious that `arr` is supposed to be a pointer to an array of values rather than a pointer to a single integer. For this reason, when passing a C-style array, its preferable to use the alternate declaration form `int arr[]`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printElementZero(const int arr[]) // treated the same as const int*
{
    std::cout << arr[0];
}

int main()
{
    const int prime[] { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    const int squares[] { 1, 4, 9, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81 };

    printElementZero(prime);  // prime decays to a pointer
    printElementZero(squares); // squares decays to a pointer

    return 0;
}
```

This program behaves identically to the prior one, as the compiler will interpret function parameter `const int arr[]` the same as `const int*`. However, this has the advantage of communicating to the caller that `arr` is expected to be a decayed C-style array, not a pointer to a single value. Note that no length information is required between the square brackets (since it is not used anyway). If a length is provided, it will be ignored.

# The problems with array decay

Although array decay was a clever solution to ensure C-style arrays of different lengths could be passed to a function without making expensive copies, the loss of array length information makes it easy for several types of mistakes to be made.

First, `sizeof()` will return different values for arrays and decayed arrays:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printArraySize(int arr[])
{
    std::cout << sizeof(arr) << '\n'; // prints 4 (assuming 32-bit addresses)
}

int main()
{
    int arr[]{ 3, 2, 1 };

    std::cout << sizeof(arr) << '\n'; // prints 12 (assuming 4 byte ints)

    printSize(arr);

    return 0;
}
```

This means using `sizeof()` on a C-style array is potentially dangerous, as you have to ensure you are using it only when you can access the actual array object, not the decayed array or pointer.

Fortunately, C++17’s better replacement `std::size()` (and C++20’s `std::ssize()`) will fail to compile if passed a pointer value:

```cpp
 std::cout << std::size(arr) << '\n'; // compile error: std::size() won't work on a pointer
```

Second, and perhaps most importantly, array decay can make refactoring (breaking long functions into shorter, more modular functions) difficult. Code that works as expected with a non-decayed array may not compile (or worse, may silently malfunction) when the same code is using a decayed array.

Third, not having length information creates several programmatic challenges. Without length information, it is different to sanity check the length of the array. Users can easily pass in arrays that are shorter than expected (or even pointers to a single value), which will then cause undefined behavior when they are subscripted with an invalid index.

# Working around array length issues

- First, we can pass in both the array and the array length as separate arguments:
	However, this still has a number of issues:
	- The caller needs to make sure that the array and the array length are paired -- if the wrong value for length is passed in, the function will still malfunction.
	- There are potential sign conversion issues if you’re using `std::size()` or a function that returns a length as `std::size_t`.
	- Runtime asserts only trigger when encountered at runtime. If our testing path doesn’t cover all calls to the function, there’s a risk of shipping a program to the customer that will assert when they do something we didn’t explicitly test for. In modern C++, we’d want to use `static_assert` for compile-time validation of the array length of constexpr arrays, but there’s no easy way to do this (as function parameters can’t be constexpr, even in constexpr or consteval functions!).
	- This method only works if we’re making an explicit function call. If the function call is implicit (e.g. we’re calling an operator with the array as an operand), then there’s no opportunity to pass in the length.
- Second, if there is an element value that is not semantically valid (e.g. a test score of `-1`), we can instead mark the end of the array using an element of that value. That way, the length of the array can be calculated by counting how many elements exist between the start of the array and this terminating element. The array can also be traversed by iterating from the start until we hit the terminating element. The nice thing about this method is that it works even with implicit function calls.
	But this method also has a number of issues:
	- If the terminating element does not exist, traversal will walk right off the end of the array, causing undefined behavior.
	- Functions that traverse the array need special handling for the terminating element (e.g. a C-style string print function needs to know not to print the terminating element).
	- There is a mismatch between the actual array length and the number of semantically valid elements. If the wrong length is used, the semantically invalid terminating element may be “processed”.
	- This approach only works if a semantically invalid value exists, which is often not the case.

# C-style arrays should be avoided in most cases

Because of the non-standard passing semantics (pass by address is used instead of pass by value) and risks associated with decayed arrays losing their length information, C-style arrays have generally fallen out of favor. We recommend avoiding them as much as possible.

# So when are C-style arrays used in modern C++?

In modern C++, C-style arrays are typically used in two cases:

1. To store constexpr global (or constexpr static local) program data. Because such arrays can be accessed directly from anywhere in the program, we do not need to pass the array, which avoids decay-related issues. The syntax for defining C-style arrays can be a little less wonky than `std::array`. More importantly, indexing such arrays does not have sign conversion issues like the standard library container classes do.
2. As parameters to functions or classes that want to handle non-constexpr C-style string arguments directly (rather than requiring a conversion to `std::string_view`). There are two possible reasons for this: First, converting a non-constexpr C-style string to a `std::string_view` requires traversing the C-style string to determine its length. If the function is in a performance critical section of code and the length isn’t needed (e.g. because the function is going to traverse the string anyway) then avoiding the conversion may be useful. Second, if the function (or class) calls other functions that expect C-style strings, converting to a `std::string_view` just to convert back may be suboptimal (unless you have other reasons for wanting a `std::string_view`).