# What is pointer arithmetic?

**Pointer arithmetic** is a feature that allows us to apply certain integer arithmetic operators (addition, subtraction, increment, or decrement) to a pointer to produce a new memory address.

Given some pointer `ptr`, `ptr + 1` returns the address of the _next object_ in memory (based on the type being pointed to).

Although less common, pointer arithmetic also works with subtraction. Given some pointer `ptr`, `ptr - 1` returns the address of the _previous object_ in memory (based on the type being pointed to).

Applying the increment (`++`) and decrement (`--`) operators to a pointer do the same thing as pointer addition and pointer subtraction respectively, but actually modify the address held by the pointer.

# Subscripting is implemented via pointer arithmetic

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    const int arr[] { 3, 2, 1 };

    // First, let's use subscripting to get the address and values of our array elements
    std::cout << &arr[0] << ' ' << &arr[1] << ' ' << &arr[2] << '\n';
    std::cout << arr[0] << ' ' << arr[1] << ' ' << arr[2] << '\n';

    // Now let's do the equivalent using pointer arithmetic
    std::cout << arr<< ' ' << (arr+ 1) << ' ' << (arr+ 2) << '\n';
    std::cout << *arr<< ' ' << *(arr+ 1) << ' ' << *(arr+ 2) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this printed:
```Output
00AFFD80 00AFFD84 00AFFD88
3 2 1
00AFFD80 00AFFD84 00AFFD88
3 2 1
```

# Pointer arithmetic and subscripting are relative addresses 

Remember, given some pointer `ptr`, both `*(ptr + 1)` and `ptr[1]` return the _next object_ in memory (based on the type being pointed to). Next is a relative term, not an absolute one. Thus, if `ptr` is pointing to element 0, then both `*(ptr + 1)` and `ptr[1]` will return element 1. But if `ptr` is pointing to element 3 instead, then both `*(ptr + 1)` and `ptr[1]` will return element 4!

# Negative indices

In the last lesson, we mentioned that (unlike the standard library container classes) the index of a C-style array can be either an unsigned integer or a signed integer. This wasn’t done just for convenience -- it’s actually possible to index a C-style array with a negative subscript. It sounds funny, but it makes sense.

We just covered that `*(ptr+1)` returns the _next object_ in memory. And `ptr[1]` is just a convenient syntax to do the same.

At the top of this lesson, we noted that `*(ptr-1)` returns the _previous object_ in memory. And `ptr[-1]` is just a convenient syntax to do the same.

# Pointer arithmetic can be used to traverse an array

One of the most common uses of pointer arithmetic is to iterate through a C-style array without explicit indexing. The following example illustrates how this is done:

```cpp
constexpr int arr[]{ 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 };

	const int* begin{ arr };                // begin points to start element
	const int* end{ arr + std::size(arr) }; // end points to one-past-the-end element

	for (; begin != end; ++begin)           // iterate from begin up to (but excluding) end
	{
		std::cout << *begin << ' ';     // dereference our loop variable to get the current element
	}
```

```Output
9 7 5 3 1
```

Note that `end` is set to one-past-the-end of the array. Having `end` hold this address is fine (so long as we don’t dereference `end`, as there isn’t a valid element at that address). We do this because it makes our math and comparisons as simple as possible (no need to add or subtract 1 anywhere).

We mentioned that array decay makes refactoring functions difficult because certain things work with non-decayed arrays but not with decayed arrays (like `std::size`). One neat thing about this traversing an array this way is that we can refactor the loop part of the above example into a separate function exactly as written, and it will still work.

[[C++/EXTRA#Range-based for loops over C-style arrays are implemented using pointer arithmetic]]
