In C++, operators are implemented as functions. By using function overloading on the operator functions, you can define your own versions of the operators that work with different data types (including classes that you’ve written). Using function overloading to overload operators is called **operator overloading**.

# **Operators as functions**

Consider the following example:

```cpp
int x { 2 };
int y { 3 };
std::cout << x + y << '\n';
```

The compiler comes with a built-in version of the plus operator (+) for integer operands -- this function adds integers x and y together and returns an integer result. When you see the expression `x + y`, you can translate this in your head to the function call `operator+(x, y)` (where operator+ is the name of the function).

Now consider this similar snippet:

```cpp
double z { 2.0 };
double w { 3.0 };
std::cout << w + z << '\n';
```

The compiler also comes with a built-in version of the plus operator (+) for double operands. Expression w + z becomes function call `operator+(w, z)`, and function overloading is used to determine that the compiler should be calling the double version of this function instead of the integer version.

Now consider what happens if we try to add two objects of a program-defined class:

```cpp
Mystring string1 { "Hello, " };
Mystring string2 { "World!" };
std::cout << string1 + string2 << '\n';
```

 Because Mystring is a program-defined type, the compiler does not have a built-in version of the plus operator that it can use for Mystring operands. So in this case, it will give us an error.

# **Resolving overloaded operators**

When evaluating an expression containing an operator, the compiler uses the following rules:

- If _all_ of the operands are fundamental data types, the compiler will call a built-in routine if one exists. If one does not exist, the compiler will produce a compiler error.
- If _any_ of the operands are program-defined types (e.g. one of your classes, or an enum type), the compiler will use the [[3.  Function overload resolution and ambiguous matches|function overload resolution algorithm]] to see if it can find an overloaded operator that is an unambiguous best match. This may involve implicitly converting one or more operands to match the parameter types of an overloaded operator. It may also involve implicitly converting program-defined types into fundamental types so that it can match a built-in operator. If no match can be found (or an ambiguous match is found), the compiler will error.

# **What are the limitations on operator overloading?**

First, almost any existing operator in C++ can be overloaded. The exceptions are: conditional (?:), sizeof, scope (::), member selector (.), pointer member selector (.*), typeid, and the casting operators.

Second, you can only overload the operators that exist. You can not create new operators or rename existing operators. For example, you could not create an `operator**` to do exponents.

Third, at least one of the operands in an overloaded operator must be a user-defined type. This means you could overload `operator+(int, Mystring)`, but not `operator+(int, double)`.

Fourth, it is not possible to change the number of operands an operator supports.

Finally, all operators keep their default precedence and associativity (regardless of what they’re used for) and this can not be changed.

Furthermore, because operators don’t have descriptive names, it’s not always clear what they are intended to do. For example, operator+ might be a reasonable choice for a string class to do concatenation of strings. But what about operator-? What would you expect that to do? It’s unclear.

Finally, overloaded operators should return values in the way that is consistent with the original operators. Operators that do not modify their operands (e.g. arithmetic operators) should generally return results by value. Operators that modify their leftmost operand (e.g. pre-increment, any of the assignment operators) should generally return the leftmost operand by reference.