C++ already knows how to convert between the built-in data types. However, it does not know how to convert any of our user-defined classes. That’s where overloading the typecast operators comes into play.

**User-defined conversions** allow us to convert our class into another data type.

We can provide a user-defined conversion by overloading the int typecast. This will allow us to convert our Cents class directly into an int. The following example shows how this is done:

```cpp
class Cents
{
private:
    int m_cents{};
public:
    Cents(int cents=0)
        : m_cents{ cents }
    {
    }

    // Overloaded int cast
    operator int() const { return m_cents; }

    int getCents() const { return m_cents; }
    void setCents(int cents) { m_cents = cents; }
};
```

There are three things to note:

1. To overload the function that casts our class to an int, we write a new function in our class called `operator int()`. Note that there is a space between the word operator and the type we are casting to. Such functions must be non-static members.
2. User-defined conversions do not have parameters, as there is no way to pass arguments explicitly to them. They do still have a hidden `*this` parameter, pointing to the implicit object (which is the object to be converted)
3. User-defined conversions do not declare a return type. The name of the conversion (e.g. int) is used as the return type, as it is the only return type allowed. This prevents redundancy.

Now in our example, we can call printInt() like this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printInt(int value)
{
    std::cout << value;
}

int main()
{
    Cents cents{ 7 };
    printInt(cents); // print 7

    std::cout << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

The compiler will first note that function printInt takes an integer parameter. Then it will note that variable cents is not an int. Finally, it will look to see if we’ve provided a way to convert a Cents into an int. Since we have, it will call our operator int() function, which returns an int, and the returned int will be passed to printInt().

Such typecasts can also be invoked explicitly via `static_cast`:

```cpp
std::cout << static_cast<int>(cents);
```

You can provide user-defined conversions to any data type you wish, including your own program-defined data types!

# Explicit typecasts

Just like we can make constructors explicit so that they can’t be used for implicit conversions, we can also make our overloaded typecasts explicit for the same reason. Explicit typecasts can only be invoked explicitly (e.g. during non-copy initialization or by using an explicit cast like `static_cast`).

```cpp
  explicit operator int() const { return m_cents; } // now marked as explicit
```

```cpp
std::cout << static_cast<int>(cents); // must use explicit cast to invoke explicit typecast
```

# Converting constructors vs overloaded typecasts

Overloaded typecasts and converting constructors perform similar roles: an overloaded typecast allows us to define a function that converts some program-defined type A into some other type B. A converting constructor allows us to define a function that creates some program-defined type A from some other type B.

In general, a converting constructor should be preferred to an overloaded typecast, as it allows the type being constructed to own the construction.

There are a few cases where an overloaded typecast should be used instead:

- When providing a conversion to a fundamental type (since you can’t define constructors for these types). Most idiomatically, these are used to provide a conversion to `bool` for cases where it makes sense to be able to use an object in a conditional statement.
- When providing a conversion to a type you can’t add members to (e.g. a conversion to `std::vector`, since you can’t define constructors for these types either).
- When you do not want the type being constructed to be aware of the type being converted from. This can be helpful for avoiding circular dependencies.