Overloading the increment (`++`) and decrement (`--`) operators is pretty straightforward, with one small exception. There are actually two versions of the increment and decrement operators: a prefix increment and decrement (e.g. `++x; --y;`) and a postfix increment and decrement (e.g. `x++; y--;`).

Because the increment and decrement operators are both unary operators and they modify their operands, they’re best overloaded as member functions.

# **Overloading prefix increment and decrement**

Prefix increment and decrement are overloaded exactly the same as any normal unary operator. We’ll do this one by example:

```cpp
Digit& Digit::operator++()
{
    // If our number is already at 9, wrap around to 0
    if (m_digit == 9)
        m_digit = 0;
    // otherwise just increment to next number
    else
        ++m_digit;

    return *this;
}

Digit& Digit::operator--()
{
    // If our number is already at 0, wrap around to 9
    if (m_digit == 0)
        m_digit = 9;
    // otherwise just decrement to next number
    else
        --m_digit;

    return *this;
}
```

Note that we return *this. The overloaded increment and decrement operators return the current implicit object so multiple operators can be “chained” together.

# **Overloading postfix increment and decrement**

Normally, functions can be overloaded when they have the same name but a different number and/or different type of parameters. However, consider the case of the prefix and postfix increment and decrement operators. Both have the same name (eg. operator++), are unary, and take one parameter of the same type. So how it is possible to differentiate the two when overloading?

The C++ language specification has a special case that provides the answer: the compiler looks to see if the overloaded operator has an int parameter. If the overloaded operator has an int parameter, the operator is a postfix overload. If the overloaded operator has no parameter, the operator is a prefix overload.

Here is the above Digit class with both prefix and postfix overloads:

```cpp
// No parameter means this is prefix operator++
Digit& Digit::operator++()
{
    // If our number is already at 9, wrap around to 0
    if (m_digit == 9)
        m_digit = 0;
    // otherwise just increment to next number
    else
        ++m_digit;

    return *this;
}

// No parameter means this is prefix operator--
Digit& Digit::operator--()
{
    // If our number is already at 0, wrap around to 9
    if (m_digit == 0)
        m_digit = 9;
    // otherwise just decrement to next number
    else
        --m_digit;

    return *this;
}

// int parameter means this is postfix operator++
Digit Digit::operator++(int)
{
    // Create a temporary variable with our current digit
    Digit temp{*this};

    // Use prefix operator to increment this digit
    ++(*this); // apply operator

    // return temporary result
    return temp; // return saved state
}

// int parameter means this is postfix operator--
Digit Digit::operator--(int)
{
    // Create a temporary variable with our current digit
    Digit temp{*this};

    // Use prefix operator to decrement this digit
    --(*this); // apply operator

    // return temporary result
    return temp; // return saved state
}
```

First, note that we’ve distinguished the prefix from the postfix operators by providing an integer dummy parameter on the postfix version. 

Second, because the dummy parameter is not used in the function implementation, we have not even given it a name. This tells the compiler to treat this variable as a placeholder, which means it won’t warn us that we declared a variable but never used it.

Third, note that the prefix and postfix operators do the same job -- they both increment or decrement the object. The difference between the two is in the value they return. The

Finally, note that we’ve written the post-increment and post-decrement in such a way that it calls the pre-increment and pre-decrement to do most of the work. This cuts down on duplicate code, and makes our class easier to modify in the future.