When working with arrays, we typically use the subscript operator ([]) to index specific elements of an array:

```cpp
myArray[0] = 7; // put the value 7 in the first element of the array
```

# Overloading operator[]

The subscript operator is one of the operators that must be overloaded as a member function. An overloaded operator[] function will always take one parameter: the subscript that the user places between the hard braces.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class IntList
{
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    int& operator[] (int index)
    {
        return m_list[index];
    }
};

/*
// Can also be implemented outside the class definition
int& IntList::operator[] (int index)
{
    return m_list[index];
}
*/

int main()
{
    IntList list{};
    list[2] = 3; // set a value
    std::cout << list[2] << '\n'; // get a value

    return 0;
}
```

Now, whenever we use the subscript operator ([]) on an object of our class, the compiler will return the corresponding element from the m_list member variable! This allows us to both get and set values of m_list directly.

This is both easy syntactically and from a comprehension standpoint. When `list[2]` evaluates, the compiler first checks to see if there’s an overloaded operator[] function. If so, it passes the value inside the hard braces (in this case, 2) as an argument to the function.

# Why operator[] returns a reference

Let’s take a closer look at how `list[2] = 3` evaluates. Because the subscript operator has a higher precedence than the assignment operator, `list[2]` evaluates first. `list[2]` calls operator[], which we’ve defined to return a reference to `list.m_list[2]`. Because operator[] is returning a reference, it returns the actual `list.m_list[2]` array element. Our partially evaluated expression becomes `list.m_list[2] = 3`, which is a straightforward integer assignment.

Because the result of operator[] can be used on the left hand side of an assignment (e.g. `list[2] = 3`), the return value of operator[] must be an l-value. As it turns out, references are always l-values, because you can only take a reference of variables that have memory addresses. So by returning a reference, the compiler is satisfied that we are returning an l-value.

Consider what would happen if operator[] returned an integer by value instead of by reference. `list[2]` would call operator[], which would return the _value of_ list.m_list[2]. For example, if m_list[2] had the value of 6, operator[] would return the value 6. `list[2] = 3` would partially evaluate to `6 = 3`, which makes no sense! If you try to do this, the C++ compiler will complain:

```Output
C:VCProjectsTest.cpp(386) : error C2106: '=' : left operand must be l-value
```

# Overloaded operator[] for const objects

The good news is that we can define a non-const and a const version of operator[] separately. The non-const version will be used with non-const objects, and the const version with const-objects.

```cpp
    // For non-const objects: can be used for assignment
    int& operator[] (int index)
    {
        return m_list[index];
    }

    // For const objects: can only be used for access
    // This function could also return by value if the type is cheap to copy
    const int& operator[] (int index) const
    {
        return m_list[index];
    }
};
```

# Removing duplicate code between const and non-const overloads

In the above example, note that the implementations of `int& IntList::operator[](int)` and `const int& IntList::operator[](int) const` are identical. The only difference is the return type of the function.

In such a case, the redundancy introduced by having many duplicate statements is more problematic, and it would be desirable to have a single implementation that we could use for both overloads.\

The preferred solution is as follows:

- Refactor the logic into another function (usually a private const member function, but could be a non-member function).
- Have the non-const function call the const function and use `const_cast` to remove the const of the returned reference.

The resulting solution looks something like this:

```cpp
class IntList
{
private:
    int m_list[10]{ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 }; // give this class some initial state for this example

    // Use private const member function to handle duplicate logic
    const int& getIndex(int index) const
    {
        // Complex code goes here
        return m_list[index];
    }

public:
    // These overloaded operators can now be implemented as a single line,
    // helping to highlight the actual difference between them
    int& operator[] (int index)
    {
        // Since we know our implicit object is non-const
        // We can strip the const off the reference returned by getIndex
        return const_cast<int&>(getIndex(index));
    }

    const int& operator[] (int index) const
    {
        return getIndex(index);
    }
};
```

Normally using `const_cast` to remove const is something we want to avoid, but in this case it’s acceptable. If the non-const overload was called, then we know we’re working with a non-const object. It’s okay to remove the const on a const reference to a non-const object.

# Detecting index validity

One other advantage of overloading the subscript operator is that we can make it safer than accessing arrays directly. Normally, when accessing arrays, the subscript operator does not check whether the index is valid. For example, the compiler will not complain about the following code:

```cpp
int list[5]{};
list[7] = 3; // index 7 is out of bounds!
```

However, if we know the size of our array, we can make our overloaded subscript operator check to ensure the index is within bounds:

```cpp
#include <cassert> // for assert()
#include <iterator> // for std::size()

class IntList
{
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    int& operator[] (int index)
    {
        assert(index >= 0 && static_cast<std::size_t>(index) < std::size(m_list));

        return m_list[index];
    }
};
```

If you don’t want to use an assert (which will be compiled out of a non-debug build) you can instead use an if-statement and your favorite error handling method (e.g. throw an exception, call `std::exit`, etc…).

# Pointers to objects and overloaded operator[] don’t mix

If you try to call operator[] on a pointer to an object, C++ will assume you’re trying to index an array of objects of that type.

Consider the following example:

```cpp
#include <cassert> // for assert()
#include <iterator> // for std::size()

class IntList
{
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    int& operator[] (int index)
    {
        return m_list[index];
    }
};

int main()
{
    IntList* list{ new IntList{} };
    list [2] = 3; // error: this will assume we're accessing index 2 of an array of IntLists
    delete list;

    return 0;
}
```

Because we can’t assign an integer to an IntList, this won’t compile. However, if assigning an integer was valid, this would compile and run, with undefined results.

The proper syntax would be to dereference the pointer first (making sure to use parenthesis since operator[] has higher precedence than operator*), then call operator[]:

```cpp
int main()
{
    IntList* list{ new IntList{} };
    (*list)[2] = 3; // get our IntList object, then call overloaded operator[]
    delete list;

    return 0;
}
```

# The function parameter does not need to be an integral type

As mentioned above, C++ passes what the user types between the hard braces as an argument to the overloaded function. In most cases, this will be an integral value. However, this is not required -- and in fact, you can define that your overloaded operator[] take a value of any type you desire. You could define your overloaded operator[] to take a double, a std::string, or whatever else you like.