
The process of producing a new value of some type from a value of a different type is called a **conversion**.

Type conversion can be invoked in one of two ways: either implicitly (as needed by the compiler), or explicitly (when requested by the programmer).

# Implicit type conversion

**Implicit type conversion** (also called **automatic type conversion** or **coercion**) is performed automatically by the compiler when one data type is required, but a different data type is supplied. The vast majority of type conversions in C++ are implicit type conversions.

# What happens when a type conversion is invoked

When a type conversion is invoked (whether implicitly or explicitly), the compiler will determine whether it can convert the value from the current type to the desired type. If a valid conversion can be found, then the compiler will produce a new value of the desired type. Note that type conversions don’t change the value or type of the value or object being converted.

If the compiler can’t find an acceptable conversion, then the compilation will fail with a compile error. Type conversions can fail for any number of reasons. For example, the compiler might not know how to convert a value between the original type and the desired type. In other cases, statements may disallow certain types of conversions.

# The standard conversions

The C++ language standard defines how different fundamental types (and in some cases, compound types) can be converted to other types. These conversion rules are called the **standard conversions**.

The standard conversions can be broadly divided into 4 categories, each covering different types of conversions:

- Numeric promotions
- Numeric conversions 
- Arithmetic conversions 
- Other conversions (which includes various pointer and reference conversions)

When a type conversion is needed, the compiler will see if there are standard conversions that it can use to convert the value to the desired type. The compiler may apply zero, one, or more than one standard conversions in the conversion process.

## Numeric promotion

Because C++ is designed to be portable and performant across a wide range of architectures, the language designers did not want to assume a given CPU would be able to efficiently manipulate values that were narrower than the natural data size for that CPU.

To help address this challenge, C++ defines a category of type conversions informally called the `numeric promotions`. A **numeric promotion** is the type conversion of certain narrower numeric types (such as a `char`) to certain wider numeric types (typically `int` or `double`) that can be processed efficiently and is less likely to have a result that overflows.

All numeric promotions are **value-preserving**, which means that the converted value will always be equal to the source value (it will just have a different type). Since all values of the source type can be precisely represented in the destination type, value-preserving conversions are said to be “safe conversions”.

Because promotions are safe, the compiler will freely use numeric promotion as needed, and will not issue a warning when doing so.

### Numeric promotion categories

The numeric promotion rules are divided into two subcategories: `integral promotions` and `floating point promotions`. Only the conversions listed in these categories are considered to be numeric promotions.

### Floating point promotions

We’ll start with the easier one.

Using the **floating point promotion** rules, a value of type `float` can be converted to a value of type `double`.

This means we can write a function that takes a `double` and then call it with either a `double` or a `float` value:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printDouble(double d)
{
    std::cout << d << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    printDouble(5.0); // no conversion necessary
    printDouble(4.0f); // numeric promotion of float to double

    return 0;
}
```

In the second call to `printDouble()`, the `float` literal `4.0f` is promoted into a `double`, so that the type of argument matches the type of the function parameter.

### Integral promotions

The integral promotion rules are more complicated.

Using the **integral promotion** rules, the following conversions can be made:

- signed char or signed short can be converted to int.
- unsigned char, char8_t, and unsigned short can be converted to int if int can hold the entire range of the type, or unsigned int otherwise.
- If char is signed by default, it follows the signed char conversion rules above. If it is unsigned by default, it follows the unsigned char conversion rules above.
- bool can be converted to int, with false becoming 0 and true becoming 1.

Assuming an 8 bit byte and an `int` size of 4 bytes or larger (which is typical these days), the above basically means that `bool`, `char`, `signed char`, `unsigned char`, `signed short`, and `unsigned short` all get promoted to `int`.

→ There are two things worth noting here. 
- First, on some architectures (e.g. with 2 byte ints) it is possible for some of the unsigned integral types to be promoted to `unsigned int` rather than `int`.

- Second, some narrower unsigned types (such as `unsigned char`) may be promoted to larger signed types (such as `int`). So while integral promotion is value-preserving, it does not necessarily preserve the signedness (signed/unsigned) of the type.

### Not all widening conversions are numeric promotions

Some widening type conversions (such as `char` to `short`, or `int` to `long`) are not considered to be numeric promotions in C++ (they are `numeric conversions`) This is because such conversions do not assist in the goal of converting smaller types to larger types that can be processed more efficiently.

The distinction is mostly academic. However, in certain cases, the compiler will favor numeric promotions over numeric conversions. We’ll see examples where this makes a difference when we cover function overload resolution.

## Numeric conversions

C++ supports another category of numeric type conversions, called **numeric conversions**. These numeric conversions cover additional type conversions between fundamental types.

There are five basic types of numeric conversions.

1. Converting an integral type to any other integral type (excluding integral promotions):

```cpp
short s = 3; // convert int to short
long l = 3; // convert int to long
char ch = s; // convert short to char
unsigned int u = 3; // convert int to unsigned int
```

2. Converting a floating point type to any other floating point type (excluding floating point promotions):

```cpp
float f = 3.0; // convert double to float
long double ld = 3.0; // convert double to long double
```

3. Converting a floating point type to any integral type:

```cpp
int i = 3.5; // convert double to int
```

4. Converting an integral type to any floating point type:

```cpp
double d = 3; // convert int to double
```

5. Converting an integral type or a floating point type to a bool:

```cpp
bool b1 = 3; // convert int to bool
bool b2 = 3.0; // convert double to bool
```

### Safe and potentially unsafe conversions

1. _Value-preserving conversions_ are safe numeric conversions where the destination type can precisely represent all the values in the source type.

For example, `int` to `long` and `short` to `double` are safe conversions, as the source value can always be converted to an equivalent value of the destination type.

Compilers will typically not issue warnings for implicit value-preserving conversions.

A value converted using a value-preserving conversion can always be converted back to the source type, resulting in a value that is equivalent to the original value.

2. _Reinterpretive conversions_ are potentially unsafe numeric conversions where the result may be outside the range of the source type. Signed/unsigned conversions fall into this category.

For example, when converting a `signed int` to an `unsigned int`.

Values converted using a reinterpretive conversion can be converted back to the source type, resulting in a value equivalent to the original value (even if the initial conversion produced a value out of range of the source type).

3. _Lossy conversions_ are potentially unsafe numeric conversions where some data may be lost during the conversion.

For example, `double` to `int` is a conversion that may result in data loss.
Conversion from `double` to `float` can also result in data loss.

Converting a value that has lost data back to the source type will result in a value that is different than the original value.

### More on numeric conversions

- In _all_ cases, converting a value into a type whose range doesn’t support that value will lead to results that are probably unexpected.
	Remember that overflow is well-defined for unsigned values and produces undefined behavior for signed values.
- Converting from a larger integral or floating point type to a smaller type from the same family will generally work so long as the value fits in the range of the smaller type.
- Converting from an integer to a floating point number generally works as long as the value fits within the range of the floating point type.
- Converting from a floating point to an integer works as long as the value fits within the range of the integer, but any fractional values are lost.