 C++ comes with a number of different **type casting operators** (more commonly called **casts**) that can be used by the programmer to request that the compiler perform a type conversion. Because casts are explicit requests by the programmer, this form of type conversion is often called an **explicit type conversion** (as opposed to implicit type conversion, where the compiler performs a type conversion automatically).

# Type casting

C++ supports 5 different types of casts: `C-style casts`, `static casts`, `const casts`, `dynamic casts`, and `reinterpret casts`. The latter four are sometimes referred to as **named casts**.

## C-style casts

In standard C programming, casts are done via the () operator, with the name of the type to convert the value placed inside the parentheses. You may still see these used in code (or by programmers) that have been converted from C.

For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 10 };
    int y { 4 };


    double d { (double)x / y }; // convert x to a double so we get floating point division
    std::cout << d << '\n'; // prints 2.5

    return 0;
}
```

In the above program, we use a C-style cast to tell the compiler to convert `x` to a `double`. Because the left operand of operator/ now evaluates to a floating point value, the right operand will be converted to a floating point value as well, and the division will be done using floating point division instead of integer division!

C++ will also let you use a `C-style cast` with a more function-call like syntax:

```cpp
double d { double(x) / y }; // convert x to a double so we get floating point division
```

Although a `C-style cast` appears to be a single cast, it can actually perform a variety of different conversions depending on context. This can include a `static cast`, a `const cast` or a `reinterpret cast` (the latter two of which you should avoid). As a result, `C-style casts` are at risk for being inadvertently misused and not producing the expected behavior, something which is easily avoidable by using the C++ casts instead.

## static_cast

The `static_cast` operator takes an expression as input, and returns the evaluated value converted to the type specified inside the angled brackets. `static_cast` is best used to convert one fundamental type into another.

# Using static_cast to make narrowing conversions explicit

Compilers will often issue warnings when a potentially unsafe (narrowing) implicit type conversion is performed. For example, consider the following program:

```cpp
int i { 48 };
char ch = i; // implicit narrowing conversion
```

Casting an `int` (2 or 4 bytes) to a `char` (1 byte) is potentially unsafe (as the compiler can’t tell whether the integer value will overflow the range of the `char` or not), and so the compiler will typically print a warning. If we used list initialization, the compiler would yield an error.

To get around this, we can use a static cast to explicitly convert our integer to a `char`:

```cpp
int i { 48 };

// explicit conversion from int to char, so that a char is assigned to variable ch
char ch { static_cast<char>(i) };
```