# Type aliases

In C++, **using** is a keyword that creates an alias for an existing data type. To create such a type alias, we use the `using` keyword, followed by a name for the type alias, followed by an equals sign and an existing data type. For example:

```cpp
using Distance = double; // define Distance as an alias for type double
```

Once defined, a type alias can be used anywhere a type is needed. For example, we can create a variable with the type alias name as the type:

```cpp
Distance milesToDestination{ 3.4 }; // defines a variable of type double
```

When the compiler encounters a type alias name, it will substitute in the aliased type.

# Naming type aliases

Historically, there hasn’t been a lot of consistency in how type aliases have been named. There are three common naming conventions (and you will run across all of them):

- Type aliases that end in a “\_t” suffix (the “\_t” is short for “type”). This convention is often used by the standard library for globally scoped type names (like `size_t` and `nullptr_t`).

This convention was inherited from C, and used to be the most popular when defining your own type aliases (and sometimes other types), but has fallen out of favor in modern C++. Note that [POSIX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX) reserves the “\_t” suffix for globally scoped type names, so using this convention may cause type naming conflicts on POSIX systems.

- Type aliases that end in a “\_type” suffix. This convention is used by some standard library types (like `std::string`) to name nested type aliases (e.g. `std::string::size_type`).

But many such nested type aliases do not use a suffix at all (e.g. `std::string::iterator`), so this usage is inconsistent at best.

- Type aliases that use no suffix.

In modern C++, the convention is to name type aliases (or any other type) that you define yourself starting with a capital letter, and using no suffix. The capital letter helps differentiate the names of types from the names of variables and functions (which start with a lower case letter), and prevents naming collisions between them.

# Type aliases are not distinct types

An alias does not actually define a new, distinct type (one that is considered separate from other types) -- it just introduces a new identifier for an existing type. A type alias is completely interchangeable with the aliased type.

# The scope of a type alias

Because scope is a property of an identifier, type alias identifiers follow the same scoping rules as variable identifiers: a type alias defined inside a block has block scope and is usable only within that block, whereas a type alias defined in the global namespace has global scope and is usable to the end of the file.

If you need to use one or more type aliases across multiple files, they can be defined in a header file and \#included into any code files that needs to use the definition:

mytypes.h:

```cpp
#ifndef MYTYPES_H
#define MYTYPES_H

    using Miles = long;
    using Speed = long;

#endif
```

Type aliases \#included this way will be imported into the global namespace and thus have global scope.

# Typedefs

A **typedef** (which is short for “type definition”) is an older way of creating an alias for a type. To create a typedef alias, we use the `typedef` keyword:

```cpp
// The following aliases are identical
typedef long Miles;
using Miles = long;
```

## Using type aliases for platform independent coding

One of the primary uses for type aliases is to hide platform specific details. On some platforms, an `int` is 2 bytes, and on others, it is 4 bytes. Thus, using `int` to store more than 2 bytes of information can be potentially dangerous when writing platform independent code.

Because `char`, `short`, `int`, and `long` give no indication of their size, it is fairly common for cross-platform programs to use type aliases to define aliases that include the type’s size in bits. For example, `int8_t` would be an 8-bit signed integer, `int16_t` a 16-bit signed integer, and `int32_t` a 32-bit signed integer. Using type aliases in this manner helps prevent mistakes and makes it more clear about what kind of assumptions have been made about the size of the variable.

In order to make sure each aliased type resolves to a type of the right size, type aliases of this kind are typically used in conjunction with preprocessor directives:

```cpp
#ifdef INT_2_BYTES
using int8_t = char;
using int16_t = int;
using int32_t = long;
#else
using int8_t = char;
using int16_t = short;
using int32_t = int;
#endif
```

On machines where integers are only 2 bytes, `INT_2_BYTES` can be \#defined (as a compiler/preprocessor setting), and the program will be compiled with the top set of type aliases. On machines where integers are 4 bytes, leaving `INT_2_BYTES` undefined will cause the bottom set of type aliases to be used. In this way, as long as `INT_2_BYTES` is
\#defined correctly, `int8_t` will resolve to a 1 byte integer, `int16_t` will resolve to a 2 bytes integer, and `int32_t` will resolve to a 4 byte integer
## Using type aliases to make complex types easier to read
## Using type aliases to document the meaning of a value
## Using type aliases for easier code maintenance

Type aliases also allow you to change the underlying type of an object without having to update lots of hardcoded types. For example, if you were using a `short` to hold a student’s ID number, but then later decided you needed a `long` instead, you’d have to comb through lots of code and replace `short` with `long`. It would probably be difficult to figure out which objects of type `short` were being used to hold ID numbers and which were being used for other purposes.

However, if you use type aliases, then changing types becomes as simple as updating the type alias (e.g. from `using StudentId = short;` to `using StudentId = long;`).

While this seems like a nice benefit, caution is necessary whenever a type is changed, as the behavior of the program may also change. This is especially true when changing the type of a type alias to a type in a different type family (e.g. an integer to a floating point value, or a signed to unsigned value)! The new type may have comparison or integer/floating point division issues, or other issues that the old type did not. If you change an existing type to some other type, your code should be thoroughly retested.

# Downsides and conclusion

While type aliases offer some benefits, they also introduce yet another identifier into your code that needs to be understood. If this isn’t offset by some benefit to readability or comprehension, then the type alias is doing more harm than good.

A poorly utilized type alias can take a familiar type (such as `std::string`) and hide it behind a custom name that needs to be looked up.

For this reason, type aliases should be used primarily in cases where there is a clear benefit to code readability or code maintenance. This is as much of an art as a science. Type aliases are most useful when they can be used in many places throughout your code, rather than in fewer places.