# Type deduction for initialized variables

**Type deduction** (also sometimes called **type inference**) is a feature that allows the compiler to deduce the type of an object from the object’s initializer. To use type deduction with variables, the `auto` keyword is used in place of the variable’s type:

```cpp
int main()
{
    auto d{ 5.0 }; // 5.0 is a double literal, so d will be type double
    auto i{ 1 + 2 }; // 1 + 2 evaluates to an int, so i will be type int
    auto x { i }; // i is an int, so x will be type int too

    return 0;
}
```

Because function calls are valid expressions, we can even use type deduction when our initializer is a non-void function call:

```cpp
int add(int x, int y)
{
    return x + y;
}

int main()
{
    auto sum { add(5, 6) }; // add() returns an int, so sum's type will be deduced to int

    return 0;
}
```

Literal suffixes can be used in combination with type deduction to specify a particular type:

```cpp
int main()
{
    auto a { 1.23f }; // f suffix causes a to be deduced to float
    auto b { 5u };    // u suffix causes b to be deduced to unsigned int

    return 0;
}
```

Type deduction will not work for objects that do not have initializers or have empty initializers. It also will not work when the initializer has type `void` (or any other incomplete type). Thus, the following is not valid:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void foo()
{
}

int main()
{
    auto x;          // The compiler is unable to deduce the type of x
    auto y{ };       // The compiler is unable to deduce the type of y
    auto z{ foo() }; // z can't have type void, so this is invalid

    return 0;
}
```

# Type deduction drops const / constexpr qualifiers

In most cases, type deduction will drop the `const` or `constexpr` qualifier from deduced types. For example:

```cpp
int main()
int main()
{
    const int x { 5 };  // x has type const int (compile-time const)
    auto y { x };       // y will be type int (const is dropped)

    constexpr auto z { x }; // z will be type constexpr int (constexpr is reapplied)

    return 0;
}
```

# Type deduction for string literals

or historical reasons, string literals in C++ have a strange type. Therefore, the following probably won’t work as expected:

```cpp
auto s { "Hello, world" }; // s will be type const char*, not std::string
```

If you want the type deduced from a string literal to be `std::string` or `std::string_view`, you’ll need to use the `s` or `sv` literal suffixes.

```cpp
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

int main()
{
    using namespace std::literals; // easiest way to access the s and sv suffixes

    auto s1 { "goo"s };  // "goo"s is a std::string literal, so s1 will be deduced as a std::string
    auto s2 { "moo"sv }; // "moo"sv is a std::string_view literal, so s2 will be deduced as a std::string_view

    return 0;
}
```

# Type deduction benefits and downsides

Type deduction is not only convenient, but also has a number of other benefits.

- First, if two or more variables are defined on sequential lines, the names of the variables will be lined up, helping to increase readability.
- Second, type deduction only works on variables that have initializers, so if you are in the habit of using type deduction, it can help avoid unintentionally uninitialized variables.
- Third, you are guaranteed that there will be no unintended performance-impacting conversions.

Type deduction also has a few downsides:

- First, type deduction obscures an object’s type information in the code. Although a good IDE should be able to show you the deduced type (e.g. when hovering a variable), it’s still a bit easier to make type-based mistakes when using type deduction.
- Second, if the type of an initializer changes, the type of a variable using type deduction will also change, perhaps unexpectedly. Consider: 
```cpp
auto sum { add(5, 6) + gravity };
```
If the return type of `add` changes from int to double, or `gravity` changes from int to double, `sum` will also change type from int to double.

# Type deduction for functions

Since the compiler already has to deduce the return type from the return statement, in C++14, the `auto` keyword was extended to do function return type deduction. This works by using the `auto` keyword in place of the function’s return type.

For example:

```cpp
auto add(int x, int y)
{
    return x + y;
}
```

Because the return statement is returning an `int` value, the compiler will deduce that the return type of this function is `int`.

When using an `auto` return type, all return statements within the function must return values of the same type, otherwise an error will result. For example:

```cpp
auto someFcn(bool b)
{
    if (b)
        return 5; // return type int
    else
        return 6.7; // return type double
}
```

In the above function, the two return statements return values of different types, so the compiler will give an error.

If such a case is desired for some reason, you can either explicitly specify a return type for your function (in which case the compiler will try to implicitly convert any non-matching return expressions to the explicit return type), or you can explicitly convert all of your return statements to the same type.

A major downside of functions that use an `auto` return type is that such functions must be fully defined before they can be used (a forward declaration is not sufficient). For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

auto foo();

int main()
{
    std::cout << foo() << '\n'; // the compiler has only seen a forward declaration at this point

    return 0;
}

auto foo()
{
    return 5;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this gives the following compile error:

```Output
error C3779: 'foo': a function that returns 'auto' cannot be used before it is defined.
```

# Trailing return type syntax

The `auto` keyword can also be used to declare functions using a **trailing return syntax**, where the return type is specified after the rest of the function prototype.

Consider the following function:

```cpp
int add(int x, int y)
{
  return (x + y);
}
```

Using the trailing return syntax, this could be equivalently written as:

```cpp
auto add(int x, int y) -> int
{
  return (x + y);
}
```

In this case, `auto` does not perform type deduction -- it is just part of the syntax to use a trailing return type.

# Type deduction can’t be used for function parameter types