EPS is the profit or loss attributed to each share.
$$EPS=\frac{Profit Attributed To OrdinaryShare}{No. of Share}$$
- Profit attributed to the equity is the Net profit less any dividend to be paid to preference share holder.
- No. of share in the denominator refer to the weighted average no. of share (weights given based on no. of months)
- $$Basic EPS=\frac{Net Profit-Preferred Dividend}{Weighted Avg No. Of Share}$$ 
- Ordinary Shares
	Also known as a common share or common stock. An equity instrument that is subordinate to all other classes of equity instrument
- Preference Share
	A share which entitles the holder to a fixed dividend, whose payment takes priority over that of ordinary share.
- Weighted Average
	No of share is calculated by adjusting the share at the beginning of the period by the no. of share bought back or issued, multiplied by a time weighting factor.

## Example
### 1

|         |       |               |       |
| ------- | ----- | ------------- | ----- |
| 1 Jan   | 10000 | 12/12         | 10000 |
| 1 April | +4000 | 9/12          | 3000  |
| 1 Sept  | -3000 | 4/12          | -1000 |
|         |       | Weighted Avg. | 12000 |
### 2 
**-> With 10% stock dividend on 1 July**

|         |       |               |     |        |
| ------- | ----- | ------------- | --- | ------ |
| 1 Jan   | 10000 | 12/12         | 1.1 | 110000 |
| 1 April | +4000 | 9/12          | 1.1 | 33000  |
| 1 Sept  | -3000 | 4/12          | 1   | -1000  |
|         |       | Weighted Avg. | ->  | 13300  |
### 3 
Net Income: 150000
Cash Dividends: 10000
Cash Dividend to Common Share: 14750
Weighted Avg.: 14000
$$\frac{150000-10000}{14000}=\frac{140000}{14000}$$
# Stock Splits & Dividend
## Incase of Stock splits
- 2 for 1 stock splits increases the share outstanding by 100%
- For EPS calculation purpose, a stock split is treated as if its occurred at the beginning of the year
## Incase of Dividend
- The weighted avg. outstanding shares increases with the dividend
- 10% dividend result in a 10% increase in the share outstanding

# Diluted EPS
-> DEPS considering all convertible securities have been converted to ordinary shares.
$$  
\text{DEPS} =  
\frac{  
(NP-P)+P+ I(1 - T)  
}{  
WAS + CPS + CDS + WO  
}  
$$  
NP = Net Profit  
P=Preferred Dividend
I = Interest Expense  
T = Tax Rate  
WAS = Weighted Average Shares  
CPS = Shares from Convertible Preferred Stock  
CDS = Shares from Convertible Debt  
WO = Shares Issuable from Warrants & Options

- We assume that the convertible securities are converted to ordinary share
