
Object-oriented programming is concerned with isolating concepts of a problem domain into separate entities and then using those entities to solve problems.

**Object-oriented programming is primarily about isolating concepts into their own entities or, in other words, creating abstractions**.
# Classes and Objects

A **class** defines the attributes of objects, i.e., the information related to them (instance variables), and their commands, i.e., their methods.

The values of instance (i.e., object) variables define the internal state of an individual object, whereas methods define the functionality it offers.

A **Method** is a piece of source code written inside a class that's been named and has the ability to be called. A method is always part of some class and is often used to modify the internal state of an object instantiated from a class.

An object is always instantiated by calling a method that created an object, i.e., a **constructor** by using the `new` keyword.

```java
ArrayList<Integer> integers = new ArrayList<>();
```

## Class

A class defines the types of objects that can be created from it. It contains instance variables describing the object's data, a constructor or constructors used to create it, and methods that define its behavior.
## Objects

An **Object** refers to an independent entity that contains both data (instance variables) and behavior (methods).

**The state of an object** is the value of its internal variables at any given point in time.
# Creating Classes

A class specifies what the objects instantiated from it are like.

- The **object's variables (instance variables)** specify the internal state of the object
- The **object's methods** specify what the object does

Let's create a class named `Person`. For this class, we create a separate file named `Person.java`. Our program now consists of two separate files since the main program is also in its own file. The `Person.java` file initially contains the class definition **public class Person** and the curly brackets that confine the contents of the class.

```java
public class Person {

}
```

Variables defined inside a class are called **instance variables**, or object fields or object attributes.

Instance variables are written on the lines following the class definition `public class Person {`. Each variable is preceded by the keyword private. The keyword **private** means that the variables are "hidden" inside the object. This is known as **encapsulation**.

```java
public class Person {
    private String name;
    private int age;
}
```

# Defining a Constructor

The constructor is defined after the instance variables.
**The constructor's name is always the same as the class name.**

In the following example, a constructor is defined for the Person class, which can be used to create a new Person object. The constructor sets the age of the object being created to 0, and the string passed to the constructor as a parameter as its name:

```java
public class Person {
    private String name;
    private int age;

    public Person(String initialName) {
        this.age = 0;
        this.name = initialName;
    }
}
```

## Default Constructor

If the programmer does not define a constructor for a class, Java automatically creates a default one for it. A default constructor is a constructor that doesn't do anything apart from creating the object. The object's variables remain uninitialized (generally, the value of any object references will be `null`, meaning that they do not point to anything, and the values of primitives will be `0`)

## Calling a Constructor

Calling a constructor with the command `new` causes several things to happen. First, space is reserved in the computer memory for storing object variables. Then default or initial values are set to object variables (e.g. an `int` type variable receives an initial value of 0). Lastly, the source code in the constructor is executed.

A constructor call returns a reference to an object. A **reference** is information about the location of object data.
# Defining Methods For an Object

As we've learned, a **method** is a named section of source code inside a class which can be invoked.

A method is written inside of the class beneath the constructor.

```java
public class Person {
    private String name;
    private int age;

    public Person(String initialName) {
        this.age = 0;
        this.name = initialName;
    }

    public void printPerson() {
        System.out.println(this.name + ", age " + this.age + " years");
    }
}
```

# A string representation of an object and the toString-method

 preferred way is to define a method for the object that returns a "string representation" of the object. The method returning the string representation is always `toString` in Java. Let's define this method for the person in the following example:

```java
public class Person {
    // ...

    public String toString() {
        return this.name + ", age " + this.age + " years";
    }
}
```

However, it doesn't itself print anything but instead returns a string representation, which the calling method can execute for printing as needed.

In principle, the `System.out.println` method requests the object's string representation and prints it. The call to the `toString` method returning the string representation does not have to be written explicitly, as Java adds it automatically.

When a programmer writes:

```java
System.out.println(antti);
```

Java extends the call at run time to the following form:

```java
System.out.println(antti.toString());
```