# The need for dynamic memory allocation

C++ supports three basic types of memory allocation, of which you’ve already seen two.

- **Static memory allocation** happens for static and global variables. Memory for these types of variables is allocated once when your program is run and persists throughout the life of your program.
- **Automatic memory allocation** happens for function parameters and local variables. Memory for these types of variables is allocated when the relevant block is entered, and freed when the block is exited, as many times as necessary.
- **Dynamic memory allocation** is the topic of this article.

Both static and automatic allocation have two things in common:

- The size of the variable / array must be known at compile time.
- Memory allocation and deallocation happens automatically (when the variable is instantiated / destroyed).


If we have to declare the size of everything at compile time, the best we can do is try to make a guess the maximum size of variables we’ll need and hope that’s enough.

This is a poor solution for at least four reasons:

- First, it leads to wasted memory if the variables aren’t actually used. For example, if we allocate 25 chars for every name, but names on average are only 12 chars long, we’re using over twice what we really need. Or consider the rendering array above: if a rendering only uses 10,000 polygons, we have 20,000 Polygons worth of memory not being used!

- Second, how do we tell which bits of memory are actually used? For strings, it’s easy: a string that starts with a \0 is clearly not being used. But what about monster[24]? Is it alive or dead right now? Has it even been initialized in the first place? That necessitates having some way to tell the status of each monster, which adds complexity and can use up additional memory.

- Third, most normal variables (including fixed arrays) are allocated in a portion of memory called the **stack**. The amount of stack memory for a program is generally quite small -- Visual Studio defaults the stack size to 1MB. If you exceed this number, stack overflow will result, and the operating system will probably close down the program.

Fortunately, these problems are easily addressed via dynamic memory allocation. **Dynamic memory allocation** is a way for running programs to request memory from the operating system when needed. This memory does not come from the program’s limited stack memory -- instead, it is allocated from a much larger pool of memory managed by the operating system called the **heap**.

# Dynamically allocating single variables

To allocate a _single_ variable dynamically, we use the scalar (non-array) form of the **new** operator:

```cpp
new int; // dynamically allocate an integer (and discard the result)
```

In the above case, we’re requesting an integer’s worth of memory from the operating system. The **new** operator creates the object using that memory, and then returns a pointer containing the _address_ of the memory that has been allocated.

Most often, we’ll assign the return value to our own pointer variable so we can access the allocated memory later.

```cpp
int* ptr{ new int }; // dynamically allocate an integer and assign the address to ptr so we can access it later
```

We can then dereference the pointer to access the memory:

```cpp
*ptr = 7; // assign value of 7 to allocated memory
```

# How does dynamic memory allocation work?

Your computer has memory (probably lots of it) that is available for applications to use. When you run an application, your operating system loads the application into some of that memory. This memory used by your application is divided into different areas, each of which serves a different purpose. One area contains your code. Another area is used for normal operations (keeping track of which functions were called, creating and destroying global and local variables, etc…). We’ll talk more about those later. However, much of the memory available just sits there, waiting to be handed out to programs that request it.

When you dynamically allocate memory, you’re asking the operating system to reserve some of that memory for your program’s use. If it can fulfill this request, it will return the address of that memory to your application. From that point forward, your application can use this memory as it wishes. When your application is done with the memory, it can return the memory back to the operating system to be given to another program.

Unlike static or automatic memory, the program itself is responsible for requesting and disposing of dynamically allocated memory.

# Initializing a dynamically allocated variable

When you dynamically allocate a variable, you can also initialize it via direct initialization or uniform initialization:

```cpp
int* ptr1{ new int (5) }; // use direct initialization
int* ptr2{ new int { 6 } }; // use uniform initialization
```

# Deleting a single variable

When we are done with a dynamically allocated variable, we need to explicitly tell C++ to free the memory for reuse. For single variables, this is done via the scalar (non-array) form of the **delete** operator:

```cpp
// assume ptr has previously been allocated with operator new
delete ptr; // return the memory pointed to by ptr to the operating system
ptr = nullptr; // set ptr to be a null pointer
```

## What does it mean to delete memory?

The delete operator does not _actually_ delete anything. It simply returns the memory being pointed to back to the operating system. The operating system is then free to reassign that memory to another application (or to this application again later).

Although it looks like we’re deleting a _variable_, this is not the case! The pointer variable still has the same scope as before, and can be assigned a new value just like any other variable.

Note that deleting a pointer that is not pointing to dynamically allocated memory may cause bad things to happen.

# Dangling pointers

C++ does not make any guarantees about what will happen to the contents of deallocated memory, or to the value of the pointer being deleted. In most cases, the memory returned to the operating system will contain the same values it had before it was returned, and the pointer will be left pointing to the now deallocated memory.

A pointer that is pointing to deallocated memory is called a **dangling pointer**. Dereferencing or deleting a dangling pointer will lead to undefined behavior. Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int* ptr{ new int }; // dynamically allocate an integer
    *ptr = 7; // put a value in that memory location

    delete ptr; // return the memory to the operating system.  ptr is now a dangling pointer.

    std::cout << *ptr; // Dereferencing a dangling pointer will cause undefined behavior
    delete ptr; // trying to deallocate the memory again will also lead to undefined behavior.

    return 0;
}
```

There are a few best practices that can help here.

First, try to avoid having multiple pointers point at the same piece of dynamic memory. If this is not possible, be clear about which pointer “owns” the memory (and is responsible for deleting it) and which pointers are just accessing it.

Second, when you delete a pointer, if that pointer is not going out of scope immediately afterward, set the pointer to nullptr.

# Operator new can fail

When requesting memory from the operating system, in rare circumstances, the operating system may not have any memory to grant the request with.

In many cases, having new throw an exception (or having your program crash) is undesirable, so there’s an alternate form of new that can be used instead to tell new to return a null pointer if memory can’t be allocated. This is done by adding the constant std::nothrow between the new keyword and the allocation type:

```cpp
int* value { new (std::nothrow) int }; // value will be set to a null pointer if the integer allocation fails
```

Note that if you then attempt to dereference this pointer, undefined behavior will result (most likely, your program will crash). Consequently, the best practice is to check all memory requests to ensure they actually succeeded before using the allocated memory.

```cpp
int* value { new (std::nothrow) int{} }; // ask for an integer's worth of memory
if (!value) // handle case where new returned null
{
    // Do error handling here
    std::cerr << "Could not allocate memory\n";
}
```

# Null pointers and dynamic memory allocation

Null pointers (pointers set to nullptr) are particularly useful when dealing with dynamic memory allocation. In the context of dynamic memory allocation, a null pointer basically says “no memory has been allocated to this pointer”. This allows us to do things like conditionally allocate memory:

```cpp
// If ptr isn't already allocated, allocate it
if (!ptr)
    ptr = new int;
```

Deleting a null pointer has no effect. Thus, there is no need for the following:

```cpp
if (ptr) // if ptr is not a null pointer
    delete ptr; // delete it
// otherwise do nothing
```

Instead, you can just write:

```cpp
delete ptr;
```

If ptr is non-null, the dynamically allocated variable will be deleted. If it is null, nothing will happen.

# Memory leaks

Dynamically allocated memory stays allocated until it is explicitly deallocated or until the program ends (and the operating system cleans it up, assuming your operating system does that). However, the pointers used to hold dynamically allocated memory addresses follow the normal scoping rules for local variables. This mismatch can create interesting problems.

Consider the following function:

```cpp
void doSomething()
{
    int* ptr{ new int{} };
}
```

This function allocates an integer dynamically, but never frees it using delete. Because pointers variables are just normal variables, when the function ends, ptr will go out of scope. This means the program has now “lost” the address of the dynamically allocated memory. As a result, this dynamically allocated integer can not be deleted.

This is called a **memory leak**. Memory leaks happen when your program loses the address of some bit of dynamically allocated memory before giving it back to the operating system. When this happens, your program can’t delete the dynamically allocated memory, because it no longer knows where it is.

Although memory leaks can result from a pointer going out of scope, there are other ways that memory leaks can result. For example, a memory leak can occur if a pointer holding the address of the dynamically allocated memory is assigned another value:

```cpp
int value = 5;
int* ptr{ new int{} }; // allocate memory
ptr = &value; // old address lost, memory leak results
```

Relatedly, it is also possible to get a memory leak via double-allocation:

```cpp
int* ptr{ new int{} };
ptr = new int{}; // old address lost, memory leak results
```

# Conclusion

Operators new and delete allow us to dynamically allocate single variables for our programs.

Dynamically allocated memory has dynamic duration and will stay allocated until you deallocate it or the program terminates.