
  
With non-derived classes, constructors only have to worry about their own members. For example, consider Base. We can create a Base object like this:

```cpp
int main()
{
    Base base{ 5 }; // use Base(int) constructor

    return 0;
}
```

Here’s what actually happens when base is instantiated:

1. Memory for base is set aside
2. The appropriate Base constructor is called
3. The member initializer list initializes variables
4. The body of the constructor executes
5. Control is returned to the caller

This is pretty straightforward. With derived classes, things are slightly more complex:

```cpp
int main()
{
    Derived derived{ 1.3 }; // use Derived(double) constructor

    return 0;
}
```

Here’s what actually happens when derived is instantiated:

1. Memory for derived is set aside (enough for both the Base and Derived portions)
2. The appropriate Derived constructor is called
3. **The Base object is constructed first using the appropriate Base constructor**. If no base constructor is specified, the default constructor will be used.
4. The member initializer list initializes variables
5. The body of the constructor executes
6. Control is returned to the caller

# **Initializing base class members**

Fortunately, C++ gives us the ability to explicitly choose which Base class constructor will be called! To do this, simply add a call to the Base class constructor in the member initializer list of the derived class:

```cpp
class Derived: public Base
{
public:
    double m_cost {};

    Derived(double cost=0.0, int id=0)
        : Base{ id } // Call Base(int) constructor with value id!
        , m_cost{ cost }
    {
    }

    double getCost() const { return m_cost; }
};
```

# **Inheritance chains**

Classes in an inheritance chain work in exactly the same way.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class A
{
public:
    A(int a)
    {
        std::cout << "A: " << a << '\n';
    }
};

class B: public A
{
public:
    B(int a, double b)
    : A{ a }
    {
        std::cout << "B: " << b << '\n';
    }
};

class C: public B
{
public:
    C(int a, double b, char c)
    : B{ a, b }
    {
        std::cout << "C: " << c << '\n';
    }
};

int main()
{
    C c{ 5, 4.3, 'R' };

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
A: 5
B: 4.3
C: R
```
It is worth mentioning that constructors can only call constructors from their immediate parent/base class. Consequently, the C constructor could not call or pass parameters to the A constructor directly. The C constructor can only call the B constructor (which has the responsibility of calling the A constructor).

# **Destructors**

When a derived class is destroyed, each destructor is called in the _reverse_ order of construction. In the above example, when c is destroyed, the C destructor is called first, then the B destructor, then the A destructor.

# **Summary**

When constructing a derived class, the derived class constructor is responsible for determining which base class constructor is called. If no base class constructor is specified, the default base class constructor will be used. In that case, if no default base class constructor can be found (or created by default), the compiler will display an error. The classes are then constructed in order from most base to most derived.