
## Statements
A computer program is a sequence of instructions that tell the computer what to do. A **statement** is a type of instruction that causes the program to _perform some action_.

#Advance 
	There are many different kinds of statements in C++:
		- Declaration statements
		- Jump statements
		- Expression statements
		- Compound statements
		- Selection 
		- statements (conditionals)
		- Iteration statements (loops)
		- Try blocks

## Functions and the main function

A **function** is a collection of statements that get executed sequentially.
Functions are typically written to do a specific job or perform some useful action.

#Rule
	Every C++ program must have a special function named **main** (all lower case letters). When the program is run, the statements inside of `main` are executed in sequential order.

#Nomenclature
	When discussing functions, it’s fairly common shorthand to append a pair of parenthesis to the end of the function’s name. For example, if you see the term `main()` or `doSomething()`, this is shorthand for functions named `main` or `doSomething` respectively. This helps differentiate functions from other things with names (such as variables) without having to write the word “function” each time.

## Syntax and syntax errors

### Syntax
The rules that govern how sentences(statements) are constructed in a language is called **syntax**.

### Syntax Error
 When you compile your program, the compiler is responsible for making sure your program follows the basic syntax of the C++ language. If you violate a rule, the compiler will complain when you try to compile your program, and issue you a **syntax error**.
## Comment

A **comment** is a programmer-readable note that is inserted directly into the source code of the program. Comments are ignored by the compiler and are for the programmer’s use only.

- Single-line comments
	The `//` symbol begins a C++ single-line comment, which tells the compiler to ignore everything from the `//` symbol to the end of the line.
- Multi-line comments
	The `/*` and `*/` pair of symbols denotes a C-style multi-line comment. Everything in between the symbols is ignored.
	Multi-line style comments can not be nested.
	```cpp
	/* This is a multi-line /* comment */ this is not inside the comment */
	```

Typically, comments should be used for three things.
1. First, for a given library, program, or function, comments are best used to describe _what_ the library, program, or function, does. These are typically placed at the top of the file or library, or immediately preceding the function.
2. Second, _within_ a library, program, or function described above, comments can be used to describe _how_ the code is going to accomplish its goal.
3. Third, at the statement level, comments should be used to describe _why_ the code is doing something.

#IMP Finally, comments should be written in a way that makes sense to someone who has no idea what the code does. It is often the case that a programmer will say “It’s obvious what this does! There’s no way I’ll forget about this”. Guess what? It’s _not_ obvious, and you _will_ be amazed how quickly you forget. :)

### Commenting out code
Converting one or more lines of code into a comment is called **commenting out** your code. This provides a convenient way to (temporarily) exclude parts of your code from being included in your compiled program.

There are quite a few reasons you might want to do this:

1. You’re working on a new piece of code that won’t compile yet, and you need to run the program. The compiler won’t let you compile the code if there are compiler errors. Commenting out the code that won’t compile will allow the program to compile so you can run it. When you’re ready, you can uncomment the code, and continue working on it.
2. You’ve written new code that compiles but doesn’t work correctly, and you don’t have time to fix it until later. Commenting out the broken code will ensure the broken code doesn’t execute and cause problems until you can fix it.
3. To find the source of an error. If a program isn’t producing the desired results (or is crashing), it can sometimes be useful to disable parts of your code to see if you can isolate what’s causing it to not work correctly. If you comment out one or more lines of code, and your program starts working as expected (or stops crashing), odds are whatever you last commented out was part of the problem. You can then investigate why those lines of code are causing the problem.
4. You want to replace one piece of code with another piece of code. Instead of just deleting the original code, you can comment it out and leave it there for reference until you’re sure your new code works properly. Once you are sure your new code is working, you can remove the old commented out code. If you can’t get your new code to work, you can always delete the new code and uncomment the old code to revert to what you had before.
