## Data
Programs produce results by manipulating (reading, changing, and writing) data.
In computing, **data** is any information that can be moved, processed, or stored by a computer.
A program can acquire data to work with in many ways: from a file or database, over a network, from the user providing input on a keyboard, or from the programmer putting data directly into the source code of the program itself.

A single piece of data is called a **value**. Common examples of values include letters (e.g. `a`), numbers (e.g. `5`), and text (e.g. `Hello`). 

## Objects and Variables

In C++, direct memory access is discouraged. Instead, we access memory indirectly through an object.
An **object** is a region of storage (usually memory) that can store a value, and has other associated properties
Although objects in C++ can be unnamed (anonymous), more often we name our objects using an identifier. An object with a name is called a **variable**.

==**An object is used to store a value in memory.
A variable is an object that has a name (identifier).**==
### Variable  instantiation

Here’s an example of defining a variable: 
```cpp
int x; // define a variable named x, of type int`
int a,b;
```

#Extra 
	**Instantiation** is a fancy word that means the object will be created and assigned a memory address.
### Data Type

A **data type** tells the compiler what type of value (e.g. a number, a letter, text, etc…) the variable will store.
### Variable assignment

After a variable has been defined, you can give it a value (in a separate statement) using the _= operator_. This process is called **assignment**, and the _= operator_ is called the **assignment operator**.

#Extra   
	By default, assignment copies the value on the right-hand side of the _= operator_ to the variable on the left-hand side of the operator. This is called **copy assignment**.
### Initialization

When a variable is defined, you can also provide an initial value for the variable at the same time. This is called **initialization**. The value used to initialize a variable is called an **initializer**.

There are 6 basic ways to initialize variables in C++:
```cpp
int a;         // no initializer (default initialization)
int b = 5;     // initializer after equals sign (copy initialization)
int c( 6 );    // initializer in parenthesis (direct initialization)

// List initialization methods (C++11) (preferred)
int d { 7 };   // initializer in braces (direct list initialization)
int e = { 8 }; // initializer in braces after equals sign (copy list initialization)
int f {};      // initializer is empty braces (value initialization)
```

- Default initialization
	When no initialization value is provided (such as for variable `a` above), this is called **default initialization**. In most cases, default initialization leaves a variable with an indeterminate value.

- Copy initialization
	When an initializer is provided after an equals sign, this is called **copy initialization**.
	
	Copy initialization is used whenever values are implicitly copied or converted, such as when passing arguments to a function by value, returning from a function by value, or catching exceptions by value.

- Direct initialization
	When an initializer is provided inside parenthesis, this is called **direct initialization**.
	
	Direct initialization was initially introduced to allow for more efficient initialization of complex objects
	
	Direct initialization is also used when values are explicitly cast to another type.
	
	One of the reasons direct initialization had fallen out of favor is because it makes it hard to differentiate variables from functions. For example:
	```cpp
	int x();  // forward declaration of function x
	int x(0); // definition of variable x with initializer 0
	```

- List initialization
	The modern way to initialize objects in C++ is to use a form of initialization that makes use of curly braces. This is called **list initialization** (or **uniform initialization** or **brace initialization**).
	
	List initialization comes in three forms:
	```cpp
	int width { 5 };    // direct list initialization of value 5 into variable width
	int height = { 6 }; // copy list initialization of value 6 into variable height
	int depth {};       // value initialization 
	```
	
	List initialization has an added benefit: it disallows “narrowing conversions”. This means that if you try to brace initialize a variable using a value that the variable can not safely hold, the compiler will produce an error.
	
	Value initialization and zero initialization
		When a variable is list initialized using empty braces, **value initialization** takes place. In most cases, **value initialization** will initialize the variable to zero (or empty, if that’s more appropriate for a given type). In such cases where zeroing occurs, this is called **zero initialization**.


```cpp
int width {}; // value initialization / zero initialization to value 0
```

### Unused initialized variables warnings

Modern compilers will typically generate warnings if a variable is initialized but not used (since this is rarely desirable). And if “treat warnings as errors” is enabled, these warnings will be promoted to errors and cause the compilation to fail.

The `[[maybe_unused]]` attribute
	To address such cases, C++17 introduced the `[[maybe_unused]]` attribute, which allows us to tell the compiler that we’re okay with a variable being unused. The compiler will not generate unused variable warnings for such variables.
	
The following program should generate no warnings/errors:

```cpp
int main()
{
    [[maybe_unused]] double pi { 3.14159 };
    [[maybe_unused]] double gravity { 9.8 };
    [[maybe_unused]] double phi { 1.61803 };

    // the above variables will not generate unused variable warnings

    return 0;
}
```

