# The input/output library
The **input/output library** (io library) is part of the C++ standard library that deals with basic input and output. We’ll use the functionality in this library to get input from the keyboard and output data to the console. The _io_ part of _iostream_ stands for _input/output_.

To use the functionality defined within the _iostream_ library, we need to include the _iostream_ header at the top of any code file that uses the content defined in _iostream_, like so:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

// rest of code that uses iostream functionality here
```

## std::cout

It allows us to send data to the console to be printed as text. _cout_ stands for “character output”.

```cpp
std::cout << "Hello world!";// print Hello world! to console
std::cout << 4;//print number 4 to the console
std::cout << x;//print the value of variable x to the console
```
We use _std::cout_, along with the **insertion operator (`<<`)**, to send the text _Hello world!_ to the console to be printed.

To print more than one thing on the same line, the insertion operator (`<<`) can be used multiple times in a single statement to concatenate (link together) multiple pieces of output. For example:
```cpp
std:cout<<"value of x is"<<x;
```

### std::cout is buffered
Statements in our program request that output be sent to the console. However, that output is typically not sent to the console immediately. Instead, the requested output “gets in line”, and is stored in a region of memory set aside to collect such requests (called a **buffer**). Periodically, the buffer is **flushed**, meaning all of the data collected in the buffer is transferred to its destination (in this case, the console).
#Extra [[C++/EXTRA#Unbuffered output|Unbuffered output]]

## std::endl

If we want to print separate lines of output to the console, we need to tell the console when to move the cursor to the next line.

One way to do that is to use _std::endl_. When output with _std::cout_, _std::endl_ prints a newline character to the console (causing the cursor to go to the start of the next line). In this context, _endl_ stands for “end line”.

```cpp
std::cout << "Hi!" << std::endl; // std::endl will cause the cursor to move to the next line of the console
std::cout << "My name is Alex." << std::endl;
```

### std::endl vs ‘\n’
Using std::endl can be a bit inefficient, as it actually does two jobs: it moves the cursor to the next line of the console, and it flushes the buffer. When writing text to the console, we typically don’t need to flush the buffer at the end of each line. It’s more efficient to let the system flush itself periodically (which it has been designed to do efficiently).

Because of this, use of the ‘\n’ character is typically preferred instead. The ‘\n’ character moves the cursor to the next line of the console, but doesn’t request a flush, so it will often perform better. The ‘\n’ character is also more concise since it’s both shorter and can be embedded into existing text.

```cpp
std::cout << "x is equal to: " << x << '\n'; // Using '\n' standalone
    std::cout << "And that's all, folks!\n"; // Using '\n' embedded into a double-quoted piece of text (note: no single quotes when used this way)
```

## std::cin
`std::cin` (which stands for “character input”) reads input from keyboard using the **extraction operator (`>>`)**. The input must be stored in a variable to be used.

Just like it is possible to output more than one bit of text in a single line, it is also possible to input more than one value on a single line:
```cpp
std::cin >> x >> y; // get two numbers and store in variable x and y respectively
```

#Advance 
	The C++ I/O library does not provide a way to accept keyboard input without the user having to press _enter_. If this is something you desire, you’ll have to use a third party library.