# Uninitalized variable
A variable that has not been given a known value (usually through initialization or assignment) is called an **uninitialized variable**.
	Unlike some programming languages, C/C++ does not initialize most variables to a given value (such as zero) automatically. Thus when a variable is given a memory address to use to store data, the default value of that variable is whatever (garbage) value happens to already be in that memory address!

# Undefined behavior
**Undefined behavior** (often abbreviated **UB**) is the result of executing code whose behavior is not well-defined by the C++ language.

Code implementing undefined behavior may exhibit _any_ of the following symptoms:

- Your program produces different results every time it is run.
- Your program consistently produces the same incorrect result.
- Your program behaves inconsistently (sometimes produces the correct result, sometimes not).
- Your program seems like it’s working but produces incorrect results later in the program.
- Your program crashes, either immediately or later.
- Your program works on some compilers but not others.
- Your program works until you change some other seemingly unrelated code.

## Implementation-defined behavior and unspecified behavior

**Implementation-defined behavior** means the behavior of some syntax is left up to the implementation (the compiler) to define. Such behaviors must be consistent and documented, but different compilers may produce different results.

**Unspecified behavior** is almost identical to implementation-defined behavior in that the behavior is left up to the implementation, but the implementation is not required to document the behavior.
