
# Literals

Literals and variables both have a value (and a type). Unlike a variable (whose value can be set and changed through initialization and assignment respectively), the value of a literal is fixed (`5` is always `5`). This is why literals are called constants.

A literal is constant while a variable can be changed. A literal’s value is placed directly in the executable, and the executable itself can’t be changed after it is created. A variable’s value is placed in memory, and the value of memory can be changed while the executable is running.

# Operators

An **operation** is a process involving zero or more input values (called **operands**) that produces a new value (called an _output value_). The specific operation to be performed is denoted by a symbol called an **operator**.
The output value of an operation is often called a **return value**.

The number of operands that an operator takes as input is called the operator’s **arity**.
	 - **Unary** operators act on one operand. 
		 An example of a unary operator is the `-` operator. For example, given `-5`, `operator-` takes literal operand `5` and flips its sign to produce new output value `-5`.
	 - **Binary** operators act on two operands.
		 The insertion (`<<`) and extraction (`>>`) operators are binary operators, taking `std::cout` or `std::cin` on the left side, and the value to output or variable to input to on the right side.
	- **Ternary** operators act on three operands.
	- **Nullary** operators act on zero operands.

[[C++/EXTRA#Return values and side effects|Return values and side effect]]

# Expression

An **expression** is a combination of literals, variables, operators, and function calls that calculates a single value. The process of executing an expression is called **evaluation**, and the single value produced is called the **result** of the expression.

When an expression is evaluated, each of the terms inside the expression are evaluated, until a single value remains. Here are some examples of different kinds of expressions, with comments indicating how they evaluate:

#IMP 
	Wherever you can use a single value in C++, you can use a value-producing expression instead, and the expression will be evaluated to produce a single value.

## Expression statements

It’s easy to convert any expression into an equivalent statement. An **expression statement** is a statement that consists of an expression followed by a semicolon. When the expression statement is executed, the expression will be evaluated.

## Subexpressions, full expressions, and compound expressions

```cpp
2               // 2 is a literal that evaluates to value 2
2 + 3           // 2 + 3 uses operator + to evaluate to value 5
x = 4 + 5       // 4 + 5 evaluates to value 9, which is then assigned to variable x
```

A **subexpression** is an expression used as an operand. For example, the subexpressions of `x = 4 + 5` are `x` and `4 + 5`. The subexpressions of `4 + 5` are `4` and `5`.

A **full expression** is an expression that is not a subexpression. All three expressions above (`2`, `2 + 3`, and `x = 4 + 5`) are full expressions.

In casual language, a **compound expression** is an expression that contains two or more uses of operators. `x = 4 + 5` is a compound expression because it contains two uses of operators (`operator=` and `operator+`). `2` and `2 + 3` are not compound expressions.