# Constant
## Integer

- short int
	- At least 2 bytes
	- Is never bigger than int
- long int
	- At least 4 bytes
	- Is never smaller than int

- signed int
	- the highest(leftmost) bit stores the sign of the number
		- 0 - if number is +tive
		- 1 - if number is -tive
- unsigned int
	- all the bits are used to store the values of number.

→ During the declarations, `signed` and `int` can be dropped,
	E.g. 
	short signed int a; → short a;


## Char - signed and unsigned

Both signed and unsigned occupy 1 byte each but have different ranges.

- signed char 
	- `signed char` is same as `char` and has range from -128 to 127
- unsigned char 
	- `unsigned char` has range from 0 to 255


## Note 

That while assigning a value to an integer or char, if it exceeds the upper bound, then the appropriate value from negative side of the range gets assigned. Likewise, if the lower bound is exceeds, then the value from the positive side of the range gets assigned.
E.g.
```c
char a=128,b=-132;
printf("%d%d",a,b);
```

```Output
-128
124
```

## Reals-float, double, long double

- float
	- Occupies 4 bytes
	- Range: (-3.4e38,+3.4e38)
- double
	- Occupies 8 bytes
	- Range: (-1.7e308,+1.7e308)
- long double
	- Occupies 10 bytes
	- Range: (-1.7e4932,+1.7e4932)




# Variable

A variable's storage class tells us :
- Where the variable would be stored.
- What would be the default initial value of the variable.
- What is the scope of the variable; i.e. in which fun. the value of the variable would be available.
- What is the life of variable; i.e. how long would the variable exist.

There are four storage classes  in C:
1. Automatic storage class
2. Register storage class
3. Static storage class
4. External storage class

## Automatic Storage Class

- Storage: Memory
- Default: Garbage Value
- Scope: Local to the block in which the variable is defined
- Life: Till the control remain within the block in which the variable is defined

##  Register Storage Class

- Storage: CPU register
	A value stored in a CPU register can always be accessed faster than the one that is stored in memory
	
	A float value required 4 bytes. So it cannot be stored in a CPU register(if the microprocessor has 16-bit CPU register)
- Default: Garbage Value 
- Scope: Local to the block in which the variable is defined
- Life: Till the control remain within the block in which the variable is defined

## Static Storage Class

- Storage: Memory
- Default: Zero
- Scope: Local to the block in which the variable is defined
- Life: Value of the variable persists between different function calls

## External Storage Class


- Storage: Memory
- Default: Zero
- Scope: Global
- Life: As long as the program's execution doesn't come to an end

#Syntax 

```c
#include<stdio.h>
int i;
void function();
int main()
{
extern int y;
.
.
}
int y=31;
```


If a variable is defined outside all function, then not only is it available to all other function in the file in which it is defined, but is also available to functions defined in other files. In the other files, the variable should be declared as extern.

