# The hidden `this` pointer

Inside every member function, the keyword **this** is a const pointer that holds the address of the current implicit object.

Most of the time, we don’t mention `this` explicitly, but just to prove we can:

```cpp
void print() const { std::cout << this->m_id; } // use `this` pointer to access the implicit object and operator-> to select member m_id
};
```

This works identically.

Note that the `print()` member functions from the prior two examples do exactly the same thing:

```cpp
void print() const { std::cout << m_id; }       // implicit use of this
void print() const { std::cout << this->m_id; } // explicit use of this
```

# How is `this` set?

Let’s take a closer look at this function call:

```cpp
simple.setID(2);
```

Although the call to function `setID(2)` looks like it only has one argument, it actually has two! When compiled, the compiler rewrites the expression `simple.setID(2);` as follows:

```cpp
Simple::setID(&simple, 2); // note that simple has been changed from an object prefix to a function argument!
```

Here’s our original member function definition for `setID()`:

```cpp
void setID(int id) { m_id = id; }
```

How the compiler rewrites functions is an implementation-specific detail, but the end-result is something like this:

```cpp
static void setID(Simple* const this, int id) { this->m_id = id; }
```

Putting it all together:

1. When we call `simple.setID(2)`, the compiler actually calls `Simple::setID(&simple, 2)`, and `simple` is passed by address to the function.
2. The function has a hidden parameter named `this` which receives the address of `simple`.
3. Member variables inside setID() are prefixed with `this->`, which points to `simple`. So when the compiler evaluates `this->m_id`, it’s actually resolving to `simple.m_id`.

# `this` always points to the object being operated on

# Explicitly referencing `this`

Most of the time, you won’t need to explicitly reference the `this` pointer. However, there are a few occasions where doing so can be useful:

First, if you have a member function that has a parameter with the same name as a data member, you can disambiguate them by using `this`:

## Returning `*this`

Second, it can sometimes be useful to have a member function return the implicit object as a return value. The primary reason to do this is to allow member functions to be “chained” together, so several member functions can be called on the same object in a single expression! This is called **function chaining** (or **method chaining**).

We can implement this kind of behavior in our member functions too. Consider the following class:

```cpp
class Calc
{
private:
    int m_value{};

public:

    void add(int value) { m_value += value; }
    void sub(int value) { m_value -= value; }
    void mult(int value) { m_value *= value; }

    int getValue() const { return m_value; }
};
```

If you wanted to add 5, subtract 3, and multiply by 4, you’d have to do this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    Calc calc{};
    calc.add(5); // returns void
    calc.sub(3); // returns void
    calc.mult(4); // returns void

    std::cout << calc.getValue() << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

However, if we make each function return `*this` by reference, we can chain the calls together. Here is the new version of `Calc` with “chainable” functions:

```cpp
class Calc
{
private:
    int m_value{};

public:
    Calc& add(int value) { m_value += value; return *this; }
    Calc& sub(int value) { m_value -= value; return *this; }
    Calc& mult(int value) { m_value *= value; return *this; }

    int getValue() const { return m_value; }
};
```

Note that `add()`, `sub()` and `mult()` are now returning `*this` by reference. Consequently, this allows us to do the following:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    Calc calc{};
    calc.add(5).sub(3).mult(4); // method chaining

    std::cout << calc.getValue() << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

# Resetting a class back to default state 

If your class has a default constructor, you may be interested in providing a way to return an existing object back to its default state.

The best way to reset a class back to a default state is to create a `reset()` member function, have that function create a new object (using the default constructor), and then assign that new object to the current implicit object, like this:

```cpp
void reset()
{
    *this = {}; // value initialize a new object and overwrite the implicit object
}
```

# `this` and const objects
#Doubt 

For non-const member functions, `this` is a const pointer to a non-const value (meaning `this` cannot be pointed at something else, but the object pointing to may be modified). With const member functions, `this` is a const pointer to a const value (meaning the pointer cannot be pointed at something else, nor may the object being pointed to be modified).

The errors generated from attempting to call a non-const member on a const object can be a little cryptic:

```Output
error C2662: 'int Something::getValue(void)': cannot convert 'this' pointer from 'const Something' to 'Something &'
error: passing 'const Something' as 'this' argument discards qualifiers [-fpermissive
```

When we call a non-const member function on a const object, the implicit `this` function parameter is a const pointer to a _non-const_ object. But the argument has type const pointer to a _const_ object. Converting a pointer to a const object into a pointer to a non-const object requires discarding the const qualifier, which cannot be done implicitly. The compiler error generated by some compilers reflects the compiler complaining about being asked to perform such a conversion.
