
- If our `getName()` function returns by value, this is safe when our implicit object is an rvalue, but makes an expensive and unnecessary copy when our implicit object is an lvalue (which is the most common case).
- If our `getName()` function returns by const reference, this is efficient (as no copy of the `std::string` is made), but can be misused when the implicit object is an rvalue (resulting in undefined behavior).

Since member functions are typically called on lvalue implicit objects, the conventional choice is to return by const reference and simply avoid misusing the returned reference in cases where the implicit object is an rvalue.

First, let’s start with our non-ref-qualified version of `getName()`

```cpp
auto& getName() const { return m_name; } // callable with both lvalue and rvalue implicit objects
```

To ref-qualify this function, we add a `&` qualifier to the overload that will match only lvalue implicit objects, and a `&&` qualifier to the overload the will match only rvalue implicit objects:

```cpp
const auto& getName() const &  { return m_name; } //  & qualifier overloads function to match only lvalue implicit objects, returns by reference
auto        getName() const && { return m_name; } // && qualifier overloads function to match only rvalue implicit objects, returns by value
```

Because these functions are distinct overloads, they can have different return types! Our lvalue-qualified overload returns by const reference, whereas our rvalue-qualified overload returns by value.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

class Employee
{
private:
	std::string m_name{};

public:
	Employee(std::string_view name): m_name { name } {}

	const auto& getName() const &  { return m_name; } //  & qualifier overloads function to match only lvalue implicit objects
	auto        getName() const && { return m_name; } // && qualifier overloads function to match only rvalue implicit objects
};

// createEmployee() returns an Employee by value (which means the returned value is an rvalue)
Employee createEmployee(std::string_view name)
{
	Employee e { name };
	return e;
}

int main()
{
	Employee joe { "Joe" };
	std::cout << joe.getName() << '\n'; // Joe is an lvalue, so this calls std::string& getName() & (returns a reference)

	std::cout << createEmployee("Frank").getName() << '\n'; // Frank is an rvalue, so this calls std::string getName() && (makes a copy)

	return 0;
}
```

# Some notes about ref-qualified member functions

First, non-ref-qualified overloads and ref-qualified overloads can not coexist. Use one or the other.

Second, if only an lvalue-qualified overload is provided (i.e. the rvalue-qualified version is not defined), any call to the function with an rvalue implicit object will result in a compilation error. This provides a useful way to completely prevent use of a function with rvalue implicit objects.

# So why don’t we recommend using ref-qualifiers?

While ref-qualifiers are neat, there are some downsides to using them in this way.

- Adding rvalue overloads to every getter that returns a reference adds clutter to the class, to mitigate against a case that isn’t that common and is easily avoidable with good habits.
- Having an rvalue overload return by value means we have to pay for the cost of a copy (or move) even in cases where we could have used a reference safely (e.g. in case 1 of the example at the top of the lesson).

Additionally:

- Most C++ developers are not aware of this feature (which can lead to errors or inefficiencies in use).
- The standard library typically does not make use of this feature.