Here is the `Date` class as above, with the constructor and `print()` member functions defined outside the class definition. Note that the prototypes for these member functions still exist inside the class definition (as these functions need to be declared as part of the class type definition), but the actual implementation has been moved outside:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Date
{
private:
    int m_year{};
    int m_month{};
    int m_day{};

public:
    Date(int year, int month, int day); // constructor declaration

    void print() const; // print function declaration

    int getYear() const { return m_year; }
    int getMonth() const { return m_month; }
    int getDay() const  { return m_day; }
};

Date::Date(int year, int month, int day) // constructor definition
    : m_year{ year }
    , m_month{ month }
    , m_day{ day }
{
}

void Date::print() const // print function definition
{
    std::cout << "Date(" << m_year << ", " << m_month << ", " << m_day << ")\n";
};
```

Note that we left the access functions defined inside the class definition. Because access functions are typically only one line, defining these functions inside the class definition adds minimal clutter, whereas moving them outside the class definition would result in many extra lines of code.

# Putting class definitions in a header file

A class definitions can be put in a header files, and then \#included into any other files that want to use the class type.

Unlike functions, which only need a forward declaration to be used, the compiler typically needs to see the full definition of a class (or any program-defined type) in order for the type to be used. This is because the compiler needs to understand how members are declared in order to ensure they are used properly, and it needs to be able to calculate how large objects of that type are in order to instantiate them. So our header files usually contain the full definition of a class rather than just a forward declaration of the class.

## Naming your class header and code files

Most often, classes are defined in header files of the same name as the class, and any member functions defined outside of the class are put in a .cpp file of the same name as the class.

## Doesn’t defining a class in a header file violate the one-definition rule if the header is \#included more than once?

Types are exempt from the part of the one-definition rule (ODR) that says you can only have one definition per program. Therefore, there isn’t an issue \#including class definitions into multiple translation units. If there was, classes wouldn’t be of much use.

Including a class definition more than once into a single translation unit is still an ODR violation. However, header guards (or `#pragma once`) will prevent this from happening.

# Inline member functions

Member functions are not exempt from the ODR, so you may be wondering how we avoid ODR violations when member functions are defined in a header file (that may then be included into more than one translation unit).

Member functions defined _inside_ the class definition are implicitly inline. Inline functions are exempt from the one definition per program part of the one-definition rule.

Member functions defined _outside_ the class definition are not implicitly inline (and thus are subject to the one definition per program part of the one-definition rule). This is why such functions are usually defined in a code file (where they will only have one definition across the whole program).

Alternatively, member functions defined outside the class definition can be left in the header file if they are made inline (using the `inline` keyword). Here’s our _Date.h_ header again, with the member functions defined outside the class marked as `inline`.

# Inline expansion of member functions

The compiler must be able to see a full definition of a function in order to perform inline expansion. Most often, such functions (e.g. access functions) are defined inside the class definition. However, if you want to define a member function outside the class definition, but still want it to be eligible for inline expansion, you can define it as an inline function just below the class definition (in the same header file). That way the definition of the function is accessible to anybody who `#includes` the header.

[So why not put everything in a header file?](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/classes-and-header-files/#:~:text=So%20why%20not%20put%20everything%20in%20a%20header%20file%3F)

# Default arguments for member functions

We discussed the best practice for default arguments of non-member functions: “If the function has a forward declaration (especially one in a header file), put the default argument there. Otherwise, put the default argument in the function definition.”

Because member functions are always declared (or defined) as part of the class definition, the best practice for member functions is actually simpler: always put the default argument inside the class definition.

# Libraries

Throughout your programs, you’ve used classes that are part of the standard library, such as `std::string`. To use these classes, you simply need to `#include` the relevant header (such as `#include <string>`). Note that you haven’t needed to add any code files (such as `string.cpp` or `iostream.cpp`) into your projects.

The header files provide the declarations that the compiler requires in order to validate that the programs you’re writing are syntactically correct. However, the implementations for the classes that belong to the C++ standard library are contained in a precompiled file that is linked in automatically at the link stage. You never see the code.

Many open source software packages provide both .h and .cpp files for you to compile into your program. However, most commercial libraries provide only .h files and a precompiled library file. There are several reasons for this: 
1) It’s faster to link a precompiled library than to recompile it every time you need it, 
2) A single copy of a precompiled library can be shared by many applications, whereas compiled code gets compiled into every executable that uses it (inflating file sizes), and 
3) Intellectual property reasons (you don’t want people stealing your code).

Separating your classes into header files and source files is not only good form, it also makes creating your own custom libraries easier. Creating your own libraries is beyond the scope of these tutorials, but separating your declaration and implementation is a prerequisite to doing so if you want to distribute precompiled binaries.