To generalize the issue, classes that use a resource (most often memory, but sometimes files, databases, network connections, etc…) often need to be explicitly sent or closed before the class object using them is destroyed. In other cases, we may want to do some record-keeping prior to the destruction of the object, such as writing information to a log file, or sending a piece of telemetry to a server. The term “clean up” is often used to refer to any set of tasks that a class must perform before an object of the class is destroyed in order to behave as expected. If we have to rely on the user of such a class to ensure that the function that performs clean up is called prior to the object being destroyed, we are likely to run into errors somewhere.

# Destructors to the rescue

We covered constructors, which are special member functions that are called when an object of a non-aggregate class type is created. Constructors are used to initialize members variables, and do any other set up tasks required to ensure objects of the class are ready for use.

Analogously, classes have another type of special member function that is called automatically when an object of a non-aggregate class type is destroyed. This function is called a **destructor**. Destructors are designed to allow a class to do any necessary clean up before an object of the class is destroyed.

# Destructor naming

Like constructors, destructors have specific naming rules:

1. The destructor must have the same name as the class, preceded by a tilde (~).
2. The destructor can not take arguments.
3. The destructor has no return type.

A class can only have a single destructor.

Generally you should not call a destructor explicitly (as it will be called automatically when the object is destroyed), since there are rarely cases where you’d want to clean up an object more than once.

Destructors may safely call other member functions since the object isn’t destroyed until after the destructor executes.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Simple
{
private:
    int m_id {};

public:
    Simple(int id)
        : m_id { id }
    {
        std::cout << "Constructing Simple " << m_id << '\n';
    }

    ~Simple() // here's our destructor
    {
        std::cout << "Destructing Simple " << m_id << '\n';
    }

    int getID() const { return m_id; }
};

int main()
{
    // Allocate a Simple
    Simple simple1{ 1 };
    {
        Simple simple2{ 2 };
    } // simple2 dies here

    return 0;
} // simple1 dies here
```

```Output
Constructing Simple 1
Constructing Simple 2
Destructing Simple 2
Destructing Simple 1
```

# An implicit destructor

If a non-aggregate class type object has no user-declared destructor, the compiler will generate a destructor with an empty body. This destructor is called an implicit destructor, and it is effectively just a placeholder.

If your class does not need to do any cleanup on destruction, it’s fine to not define a destructor at all, and let the compiler generate an implicit destructor for your class.

# A warning about the `std::exit()` function

 We discussed the `std::exit()` function, can be used to terminate your program immediately. When the program is terminated immediately, the program just ends. Local variables are not destroyed first, and because of this, no destructors will be called. Be wary if you’re relying on your destructors to do necessary cleanup work in such a case.