Type template parameters in member functions

Type template parameters defined as part of a class template parameter declaration can be used both as the type of data members and as the type of member function parameters.

In the following example, we write the `Pair` class template, converting it from a struct to a class:
```cpp
#include <ios>       // for std::boolalpha
#include <iostream>

template <typename T>
class Pair
{
private:
    T m_first{};
    T m_second{};

public:
    // When we define a member function inside the class definition,
    // the template parameter declaration belonging to the class applies
    Pair(const T& first, const T& second)
        : m_first{ first }
        , m_second{ second }
    {
    }

    bool isEqual(const Pair<T>& pair);
};

// When we define a member function outside the class definition,
// we need to resupply a template parameter declaration
template <typename T>
bool Pair<T>::isEqual(const Pair<T>& pair)
{
    return m_first == pair.m_first && m_second == pair.m_second;
}

int main()
{
    Pair p1{ 5, 6 }; // uses CTAD to infer type Pair<int>
    std::cout << std::boolalpha << "isEqual(5, 6): " << p1.isEqual( Pair{5, 6} ) << '\n';
    std::cout << std::boolalpha << "isEqual(5, 7): " << p1.isEqual( Pair{5, 7} ) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

The above should be pretty straightforward, but there are a few things worth noting.

First, because our class has private members, it is not an aggregate, and therefore can’t use aggregate initialization. Instead, we have to initialize our class objects using a constructor.

Since our class data members are of type `T`, we make the parameters of our constructor type `const T&`, so the user can supply initialization values of the same type. Because `T` might be expensive to copy, it’s safer to pass by const reference than by value.

Note that when we define a member function inside the class template definition, we don’t need to provide a template parameter declaration for the member function. Such member functions implicitly use the class template parameter declaration.

Second, we don’t need deduction guides for CTAD to work with non-aggregate classes. A matching constructor provides the compiler with the information it needs to deduce the template parameters from the initializers.

Third, let’s look more closely at the case where we define a member function for a class template outside of the class template definition:
```cpp
template <typename T>
bool Pair<T>::isEqual(const Pair<T>& pair)
{
    return m_first == pair.m_first && m_second == pair.m_second;
}
```

Since this member function definition is separate from the class template definition, we need to resupply a template parameter declaration (`template <typename T>`) so the compiler knows what `T` is.

Also, when we define a member function outside of the class, we need to qualify the member function name with the fully templated name of the class template (`Pair<T>::isEqual`, not `Pair::isEqual`).

# Where to define member functions for class templates outside the class

With member functions for class templates, the compiler needs to see both the class definition (to ensure that the member function template is declared as part of the class) and the template member function definition (to know how to instantiate the template). Therefore, we typically want to define both a class and its member function templates in the same location.

When a member function template is defined _inside_ the class definition, the template member function definition is part of the class definition, so anywhere the class definition can be seen, the template member function definition can also be seen. This makes things easy (at the cost of cluttering our class definition).

When a member function template is defined _outside_ the class definition, it should generally be defined immediately below the class definition. That way, anywhere the class definition can be seen, the member function template definitions immediately below the class definition will also be seen.

In the typical case where a class is defined in a header file, this means any member function templates defined outside the class should also be defined in the same header file, below the class definition.