
Member variables of a class can be made static by using the `static` keyword. Unlike normal member variables, **static member variables** are shared by all objects of the class. Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct Something
{
    static int s_value; // now static
};

int Something::s_value{ 1 }; // initialize s_value to 1

int main()
{
    Something first{};
    Something second{};

    first.s_value = 2;

    std::cout << first.s_value << '\n';
    std::cout << second.s_value << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

```Output
2
2
```

# Static members are not associated with class objects

Although you can access static members through objects of the class (as shown with `first.s_value` and `second.s_value` in the example above), static members exist even if no objects of the class have been instantiated! This makes sense: they are created at the start of the program and destroyed at the end of the program, so their lifetime is not bound to a class object like a normal member.

Essentially, static members are global variables that live inside the scope region of the class. There is very little difference between a static member of a class and a normal variable inside a namespace.

Because static member `s_value` exists independently of any class objects, it can be accessed directly using the class name and the scope resolution operator (in this case, `Something::s_value`):

```cpp
int main()
{
    // note: we're not instantiating any objects of type Something

    Something::s_value = 2;
    std::cout << Something::s_value << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

# Defining and initializing static member variables

When we declare a static member variable inside a class type, we’re telling the compiler about the existence of a static member variable, but not actually defining it (much like a forward declaration). Because static member variables are essentially global variables, you must explicitly define (and optionally initialize) the static member outside of the class, in the global scope.

In the example above, we do so via this line:

```cpp
int Something::s_value{ 1 }; // defines the static member variable
```

Note that this static member definition is not subject to access controls: you can define and initialize the value even if it’s declared as private (or protected) in the class.

# Initialization of static member variables inside the class definition\

There are a few shortcuts to the above. First, when the static member is a constant integral type (which includes `char` and `bool`) or a const enum, the static member can be initialized inside the class definition:

```cpp
class Whatever
{
public:
    static const int s_value{ 4 }; // a static const int can be defined and initialized directly
};
```

In the above example, because the static member variable is a const int, no explicit definition line is needed. This shortcut is allowed because these specific const types are compile-time constants.

Second, we introduced inline variables, which are variables that are allowed to have multiple definitions. C++17 allows static members to be inline variables:

```cpp
class Whatever
{
public:
    static inline int s_value{ 4 }; // a static inline variable can be defined and initialized directly
};
```

Such variables can be initialized inside the class definition regardless of whether they are constant or not. This is the preferred method of defining and initializing static members.

Because `constexpr` members are implicitly inline (as of C++17), static `constexpr` members can also be initialized inside the class definition without explicit use of the `inline` keyword.

# An example of static member variables

Why use static variables inside classes? One use is to assign a unique ID to every instance of the class. Here’s an example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Something
{
private:
    static inline int s_idGenerator { 1 };
    int m_id {};

public:
    // grab the next value from the id generator
    Something() : m_id { s_idGenerator++ }
    {
    }

    int getID() const { return m_id; }
};

int main()
{
    Something first{};
    Something second{};
    Something third{};

    std::cout << first.getID() << '\n';
    std::cout << second.getID() << '\n';
    std::cout << third.getID() << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

```Output
1
2
3
```

# Only static members may use type deduction (`auto` and CTAD)

A static member may use `auto` to deduce its type from the initializer, or Class Template Argument Deduction (CTAD) to deduce template type arguments from the initializer.

Non-static members may not use `auto` or CTAD.