# Friendship is magic

Inside the body of a class, a **friend declaration** (using the `friend` keyword) can be used to tell the compiler that some other class or function is now a friend. In C++, a **friend** is a class or function (member or non-member) that has been granted full access to the private and protected members of another class. In this way, a class can selectively give other classes or functions full access to their members without impacting anything else.

For example, if our storage class made the display class a friend, then the display class would be able to access all members of the storage class directly. The display class could use this direct access to implement display of the storage class, while remaining structurally separate.

The friend declaration is not affected by access controls, so it does not matter where within the class body it is placed.

# Friend non-member functions

A **friend function** is a function (member or non-member) that can access the private and protected members of a class as though it were a member of that class. In all other regards, the friend function is a normal function.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Accumulator
{
private:
    int m_value { 0 };

public:
    void add(int value) { m_value += value; }

    // Here is the friend declaration that makes non-member function void print(const Accumulator& accumulator) a friend of Accumulator
    friend void print(const Accumulator& accumulator);
};

void print(const Accumulator& accumulator)
{
    // Because print() is a friend of Accumulator
    // it can access the private members of Accumulator
    std::cout << accumulator.m_value;
}

int main()
{
    Accumulator acc{};
    acc.add(5); // add 5 to the accumulator

    print(acc); // call the print() non-member function

    return 0;
}
```

# Defining a friend non-member inside a class

Much like member functions can be defined inside a class if desired, friend non-member functions can also be defined inside a class. The following example defines friend non-member function `print()` inside the `Accumulator` class:

```cpp
class Accumulator
{
private:
    int m_value { 0 };

public:
    void add(int value) { m_value += value; }

    // Friend functions defined inside a class are non-member functions
    friend void print(const Accumulator& accumulator)
    {
        // Because print() is a friend of Accumulator
        // it can access the private members of Accumulator
        std::cout << accumulator.m_value;
    }
};
```

# Multiple friends

A function can be a friend of more than one class at the same time.

Class forward declarations serve the same role as function forward declarations -- they tell the compiler about an identifier that will be defined later. However, unlike functions, classes have no return types or parameters, so class forward declarations are always simply `class ClassName` (unless they are class templates).

```cpp
class Humidity; // forward declaration of Humidity

class Temperature
{
    friend void printWeather(const Temperature& temperature, const Humidity& humidity); // forward declaration needed for this line
};
```
# Doesn’t friendship violate the principle of data hiding?

No. Friendship is granted by the class doing the data hiding with the expectation that the friend will access its private members. Think of a friend as an extension of the class itself, with all the same access rights. As such, access is expected, not a violation.

Used properly, friendship can make a program more maintainable by allowing functionality to be separated when it makes sense from a design perspective (as opposed to having to keep it together for access control reasons). Or when it makes more sense to use a non-member function instead of a member function.

However, because friends have direct access to the implementation of a class, changes to the implementation of the class will typically necessitate changes to the friends as well. If a class has many friends (or those friends have friends), this can lead to a ripple effect.

When implementing a friend function, prefer to use the class interface over direct access whenever possible. This will help insulate your friend function from future implementation changes and lead to less code needing to be modified and/or retested later.

# Prefer non-friend functions to friend functions