An Array contains a limited amount of numbered spots (indices) for values. The length (or size) of an Array is the amount of these spots, i.e. how many values can you place in the Array. The values in an Array are called **elements**.

# Creating an Array

There are two ways to create an Array. 
## In the first one you have to explicitly define the size upon the creating. 

This is how you create an Array to hold three integers:

```java
int[] numbers = new int[3];
```

An Array to hold 5 Strings can be created like this:

```java
String[] strings = new String[5];
```

## The shorter way to create an array

So apart from calling for `new`, we can also initialize an array with a block, that contains comma-separated values to be assigned in the array.

```java
int[] numbers = {100, 1, 42};
```

When you initialize an array with a block, the length of the array is precisely the number of the values specified in the block. The values of the block are assigned to the array in the order, eg. the first value is assigned to index 0, the second value to index 1 etc.
# Assigning and accessing elements

An element of an Array is referred to by its index. In the example below we create an Array to hold 3 integers, and then assign values to indices 0 and 2. After that we print the values.

```java
int[] numbers = new int[3];
numbers[0] = 2;
numbers[2] = 5;

System.out.println(numbers[0]);
System.out.println(numbers[2]);
```

# Size of an array and iterating

You can find the size of the array through the associated variable `length`.

You can access this associated variable by writing name of the array dot name of the variable, i.e. `numbers.length`.

If the index is pointing outside the Array, i.e. the element doesn't exist, we get an **ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException**. This error tells, that the Array doesn't contain the given index. You cannot access outside of the Array, i.e. index that's less than 0 or greater or equal to the size of the Array.

# Array as a parameter of a method

You can use arrays as a parameter of a method just like any other variable. 

```java
public static void listElements(int[] integerArray)
```

As an array is a reference type, the value of the array is a reference to the information contained in the array. When you use array as a parameter of a method, the method receives a copy of the reference to the array.