[Introduction to object-oriented programming](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-object-oriented-programming/)

In **object-oriented programming** (often abbreviated as OOP), the focus is on creating program-defined data types that contain both properties and a set of well-defined behaviors. The term “object” in OOP refers to the objects that we can instantiate from such types.

This leads to code that looks more like this:

```cpp
you.eat(apple);
```

This makes it clearer who the subject is (`you`), what behavior is being invoked (`eat()`), and what objects are accessories to that behavior (`apple`).

# The class invariant problem

Perhaps the biggest difficulty with structs is that they do not provide an effective way to document and enforce class invariants.

We defined an invariant as, “a condition that must be true while some component is executing”.

In the context of class types (which include structs, classes, and unions), a **class invariant** is a condition that must be true throughout the lifetime of an object in order for the object to remain in a valid state. An object that has a violated class invariant is said to be in an **invalid state**, and unexpected or undefined behavior may result from further use of that object.

# Introduction to classes

Just like structs, a **class** is a program-defined compound type that can have many member variables with different types.

## Defining a class

Classes are defined similarly to structs, except we use the `class` keyword instead of `struct`.

```cpp
class Employee
{
    int m_id {};
    int m_age {};
    double m_wage {};
};
```

## Most of the C++ standard library is classes

You have already been using class objects, perhaps without knowing it. Both `std::string` and `std::string_view` are defined as classes. In fact, most of the non-aliased types in the standard library are defined as classes!

# Member functions

In addition to having member variables, class types (which includes structs, classes, and unions) can also have their own functions! Functions that belong to a class type are called **member functions**.

Functions that are not member functions are called **non-member functions** (or occasionally **free functions**) to distinguish them from member functions.

```cpp
// Member function version
#include <iostream>

struct Date
{
    int year {};
    int month {};
    int day {};

    void print() // defines a member function named print
    {
        std::cout << year << '/' << month << '/' << day;
    }
};

int main()
{
    Date today { 2020, 10, 14 }; // aggregate initialize our struct

    today.day = 16; // member variables accessed using member selection operator (.)
    today.print();  // member functions also accessed using member selection operator (.)

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
2020/10/16
```

## Member functions are declared inside the class type definition

In the non-member example, the `print()` non-member function is defined outside of the `Date` struct, in the global namespace. By default, it has external linkage, so it could be called from other source files (with the appropriate forward declaration).

In the member example, the `print()` member function is declared (and in this case, defined) inside the `Date` struct definition. Because `print()` is declared as part of the `Date`, this tells the compiler that `print()` is a member function.

Member functions defined inside the class type definition are implicitly inline, so they will not cause violations of the one-definition rule if the class type definition is included into multiple code files.

## Calling member functions (and the implicit object)

In the non-member function, we call `print(today)`, where `today` is (explicitly) passed as an argument.

In the member function, we call `today.print()`. This syntax, which uses the member selection operator (.) to select the member function to call, is consistent with how we access member variables (e.g. `today.day = 16;`).

All (non-static) member functions must be called using an object of that class type. In this case, `today` is the object that `print()` is being called on.

Note that in the member function case, we don’t need to pass `today` as an argument. The object that a member function is called on is _implicitly_ passed to the member function. For this reason, the object that a member function is called on is often called **the implicit object**.

In other words, when we call `today.print()`, `today` is the implicit object, and it is implicitly passed to the `print()` member function.

## Accessing members inside a member function uses the implicit object

Here’s the non-member version of `print()` :

```cpp
// non-member version of print
void print(const Date& date)
{
    // member variables accessed using member selection operator (.)
    std::cout << date.year << '/' << date.month << '/' << date.day;
}
```

Now let’s look at the definition of the `print()` member function again:

```cpp
void print() // defines a member function named print()
{
    std::cout << year << '/' << month << '/' << day;
}
```

In the member example, we access the members as `year`, `month,` and `day`.

In other words, when `today.print()` is called, `today` is our implicit object, and `year`, `month`, and `day` (which are not prefixed) evaluate to the values of `today.year`, `today.month`, and `today.day` respectively.

# Another member function example

Here’s an example with a slightly more complex member function:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

struct Person
{
    std::string name{};
    int age{};

    void kisses(const Person& person)
    {
        std::cout << name << " kisses " << person.name << '\n';
    }
};

int main()
{
    Person joe{ "Joe", 29 };
    Person kate{ "Kate", 27 };

    joe.kisses(kate);

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
Joe kisses Kate
```

# Member variables and functions can be defined in any order

The C++ compiler normally compiles code from top to bottom. For each name encountered, the compiler determines whether it has already seen a declaration for that name, so that it can do proper type checking.

This means that inside a non-member function, you can’t access a variable or call a function that hasn’t at least been declared.

However, with member functions (and member data initializers), this limitation doesn’t apply, and we can define our members in any order we like. For example:

```cpp
struct Foo
{
    int m_x{ y() };   // okay to call y() here, even though y() isn't defined until later

    void x() { y(); } // okay to call y() here, even though y() isn't defined until later
    int y()  { return 5; }
};
```

# Member functions can be overloaded

Just like non-member functions, member functions can be overloaded, so long as each member function can be differentiated.

# Structs and member functions

In modern C++, it is fine for structs to have member functions. This excludes constructors, which are a special type of member function.

A class type with a constructor is no longer an aggregate, and we want our structs to remain aggregates.

# Class types with no data members

It is possible to create class types with no data members (e.g. class types that only have member functions). It is also possible to instantiate objects of such a class type:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct Foo
{
    void printHi() { std::cout << "Hi!\n"; }
};

int main()
{
    Foo f{};
    f.printHi(); // requires object to call

    return 0;
}
```

However, if a class type does not have any data members, then using a class type is probably overkill. In such cases, consider using a namespace (containing non-member functions) instead. This makes it clearer to the reader that no data is being managed (and does not require an object to be instantiated to call the functions).