```cpp
#include <iostream>

class IntPair
{
private:
    int m_x{};
    int m_y{};

public:
    IntPair(int x, int y)
        : m_x { x }, m_y { y }
    {}

    int x() const { return m_x; }
    int y() const{ return m_y; }
};

void print(IntPair p)
{
    std::cout << "(" << p.x() << ", " << p.y() << ")\n";
}

int main()
{
    // Case 1: Pass variable
    IntPair p { 3, 4 };
    print(p);

    // Case 2: Construct temporary IntPair and pass to function
    print(IntPair { 5, 6 } );

    // Case 3: Implicitly convert { 7, 8 } to a temporary Intpair and pass to function
    print( { 7, 8 } );

    return 0;
}
```

In case 1, we’re instantiating variable `IntPair p` and then passing `p` to function `print()`.

However, `p` is only used once, and function `print()` will accept rvalues, so there is really no reason to define a variable here. So let’s get rid of `p`.

We can do that by passing a temporary object instead of a named variable. A **temporary object** (sometimes called an **anonymous object** or an **unnamed object**) is an object that has no name and exists only for the duration of a single expression.

In case 2, we’re telling the compiler to construct an `IntPair` object, and initializing it with `{ 5, 6 }`. Because this object has no name, it is a temporary. The temporary object is then passed to parameter `p` of function `print()`. When the function call returns, the temporary object is destroyed.

In case 3, we’re also creating a temporary `IntPair` object to pass to function `print()`. However, because we have not explicitly specified what type to construct, the compiler will deduce the necessary type (`IntPair`) from the function parameter, and then implicitly convert `{ 7, 8 }` to an `IntPair` object.

It is possibly even more common to see temporary objects used with return values:
```cpp
// Case 1: Create named variable and return
IntPair ret1()
{
    IntPair p { 3, 4 };
    return p;
}

// Case 2: Create temporary IntPair and return
IntPair ret2()
{
    return IntPair { 5, 6 };
}

// Case 3: implicitly convert { 7, 8 } to IntPair and return
IntPair ret3()
{
    return { 7, 8 };
}
```

# A few notes

First, just as in the case of an `int`, when used in an expression, a temporary class object is an rvalue. Thus, such objects can only be used where rvalue expressions are accepted.

Second, temporary objects are created at the point of definition, and destroyed at the end of the full expression in which they are defined. A full expression is an expression that is not a subexpression.