A **copy constructor** is a constructor that is used to initialize an object with an existing object of the same type. After the copy constructor executes, the newly created object should be a copy of the object passed in as the initializer.

# An implicit copy constructor

If you do not provide a copy constructor for your classes, C++ will create a public **implicit copy constructor** for you. In the above example, the statement `Fraction fCopy { f };` is invoking the implicit copy constructor to initialize `fCopy` with `f`.

By default, the implicit copy constructor will do memberwise initialization. This means each member will be initialized using the corresponding member of the class passed in as the initializer. In the example above, `fCopy.m_numerator` is initialized using `f.m_numerator` (which has value `5`), and `fCopy.m_denominator` is initialized using `f.m_denominator` (which has value `3`).

# Defining your own copy constructor

The copy constructor looks just like you’d expect it to:

```cpp
 // Copy constructor
    Fraction(const Fraction& fraction)
        // Initialize our members using the corresponding member of the parameter
        : m_numerator{ fraction.m_numerator }
        , m_denominator{ fraction.m_denominator }
    {
        std::cout << "Copy constructor called\n"; // just to prove it works
    }
```

# Prefer the implicit copy constructor

Unlike the implicit default constructor, which does nothing (and thus is rarely what we want), the member wise initialization performed by the implicit copy constructor is usually exactly what we want. Therefore, in most cases, using the implicit copy constructor is perfectly fine.

# The copy constructor’s parameter must be a reference

It is a requirement that the parameter of a copy constructor be an lvalue reference or const lvalue reference. Because the copy constructor should not be modifying the parameter, using a const lvalue reference is preferred.

# Pass by value (and return by value) and the copy constructor

When an object is passed by value, the argument is copied into the parameter. When the argument and parameter are the same class type, the copy is made by implicitly invoking the copy constructor. Similarly, when an object is returned back to the caller by value, the copy constructor is implicitly invoked to make the copy.

We see both happen in the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Fraction
{
private:
    int m_numerator{ 0 };
    int m_denominator{ 1 };

public:
    // Default constructor
    Fraction(int numerator = 0, int denominator = 1)
        : m_numerator{ numerator }, m_denominator{ denominator }
    {
    }

    // Copy constructor
    Fraction(const Fraction& fraction)
        : m_numerator{ fraction.m_numerator }
        , m_denominator{ fraction.m_denominator }
    {
        std::cout << "Copy constructor called\n";
    }

    void print() const
    {
        std::cout << "Fraction(" << m_numerator << ", " << m_denominator << ")\n";
    }
};

void printFraction(Fraction f) // f is pass by value
{
    f.print();
}

Fraction generateFraction(int n, int d)
{
    Fraction f{ n, d };
    return f;
}

int main()
{
    Fraction f{ 5, 3 };

    printFraction(f); // f is copied into the function parameter using copy constructor

    Fraction f2{ generateFraction(1, 2) }; // Fraction is returned using copy constructor

    printFraction(f2); // f is copied into the function parameter using copy constructor

    return 0;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this example prints:

```Output
Copy constructor called
Fraction(5, 3)
Copy constructor called
Copy constructor called
Fraction(1, 2)
```

# Using `= default` to generate a default copy constructor

f a class has no copy constructor, the compiler will implicitly generate one for us. If we prefer, we can explicitly request the compiler create a default copy constructor for us using the `= default` syntax:

```cpp
 // Explicitly request default copy constructor
    Fraction(const Fraction& fraction) = default;
```

# Using `= delete` to prevent copies

Occasionally we run into cases where we do not want objects of a certain class to be copyable. We can prevent this by marking the copy constructor function as deleted, using the `= delete` syntax:

```cpp
// Delete the copy constructor so no copies can be made
    Fraction(const Fraction& fraction) = delete;
```
```cpp
int main()
{
    Fraction f { 5, 3 };
    Fraction fCopy { f }; // compile error: copy constructor has been deleted

    return 0;
}
```

>You can also prevent the public from making copies of class object by making the copy constructor private (as private functions can’t be called by the public). However, a private copy constructor _can_ still be called from other members of the class, so this solution is not advised unless that is desired.