We discuss 6 basic types of initialization for objects with fundamental types:

```cpp
int a;         // no initializer (default initialization)
int b = 5;     // initializer after equals sign (copy initialization)
int c( 6 );    // initializer in parentheses (direct initialization)

// List initialization methods (C++11)
int d { 7 };   // initializer in braces (direct list initialization)
int e = { 8 }; // initializer in braces after equals sign (copy list initialization)
int f {};      // initializer is empty braces (value initialization)
```

All of these initialization types are valid for object with class types:

```cpp
int main()
{
    // Calls Foo() default constructor
    Foo f1;           // default initialization
    Foo f2{};         // value initialization (preferred)

    // Calls foo(int) normal constructor
    Foo f3 = 3;       // copy initialization (non-explicit constructors only)
    Foo f4(4);        // direct initialization
    Foo f5{ 5 };      // direct list initialization (preferred)
    Foo f6 = { 6 };   // copy list initialization (non-explicit constructors only)

    // Calls foo(const Foo&) copy constructor
    Foo f7 = f3;      // copy initialization
    Foo f8(f3);       // direct initialization
    Foo f9{ f3 };     // direct list initialization (preferred)
    Foo f10 = { f3 }; // copy list initialization

    return 0;
```

In modern C++, copy initialization, direct initialization, and list initialization essentially do the same thing -- they initialize an object.

For all types of initialization:

- When initializing a class type, the set of constructors for that class are examined, and overload resolution is used to determine the best matching constructor. This may involve implicit conversion of arguments.
- When initializing a non-class type, the implicit conversion rules are used to determine whether an implicit conversion exists.

It is also worth noting that in some circumstances, certain forms of initialization are disallowed (e.g. in a constructor member initializer list, we can only use direct forms of initialization, not copy initialization).

# Copy elision

Since the compiler is free to rewrite statements to optimize them, one might wonder if the compiler can optimize away the unnecessary copy and treat `Something s { Something{5} };` as if we had written `Something s { 5 }` in the first place.

The answer is yes, and the process of doing so is called _copy elision_. **Copy elision** is a compiler optimization technique that allows the compiler to remove unnecessary copying of objects. In other words, in cases where the compiler would normally call a copy constructor, the compiler is free to rewrite the code to avoid the call to the copy constructor altogether. When the compiler optimizes away a call to the copy constructor, we say the constructor has been **elided**.

Unlike other types of optimization, copy elision is exempt from the “as-if” rule. That is, copy elision is allowed to elide the copy constructor even if the copy constructor has side effects (such as printing text to the console)! This is why copy constructors should not have side effects other than copying -- if the compiler elides the call to the copy constructor, the side effects won’t execute, and the observable behavior of the program will change!

# Copy elision in pass by value and return by value

The copy constructor is normally called when an argument of the same type as the parameter is passed by value or return by value is used. However, in certain cases, these copies may be elided.

# Copy elision errata

Prior to C++17, copy elision was strictly an optional optimization that compilers could make. In C++17, copy elision became mandatory in some cases.

In optional elision cases, an accessible copy constructor must be available (e.g. not deleted), even if the actual call to the copy constructor is elided.

In mandatory elision cases, an accessible copy constructor need not be available (in other words, mandatory elision can happen even if the copy constructor is deleted).