# User-defined conversions

Now consider the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x{};
public:
    Foo(int x)
        : m_x{ x }
    {
    }

    int getX() const { return m_x; }
};

void printFoo(Foo f) // has a Foo parameter
{
    std::cout << f.getX();
}

int main()
{
    printFoo(5); // we're supplying an int argument

    return 0;
}
```

In this version, `printFoo` has a `Foo` parameter but we’re passing in an argument of type `int`. Because these types do not match, the compiler will try to implicitly convert int value `5` into a `Foo` object so the function can be called.

Unlike the implicit type conversion, where our parameter and argument types were both fundamental types (and thus can be converted using the built-in numeric promotion/conversion rules), in this case, one of our types is a program-defined type. The C++ standard doesn’t have specific rules that tell the compiler how to convert values to (or from) a program-defined type.

Instead, the compiler will look to see if we have defined some function that it can use to perform such a conversion. Such a function is called a **user-defined conversion**.

# Converting constructors

A constructor that can be used to perform an implicit conversion is called a **converting constructor**. By default, all constructors are converting constructors.

# Only one user-defined conversion may be applied

Only one user-defined conversion may be applied

Now consider the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

class Employee
{
private:
    std::string m_name{};

public:
    Employee(std::string_view name)
        : m_name{ name }
    {
    }

    const std::string& getName() const { return m_name; }
};

void printEmployee(Employee e) // has an Employee parameter
{
    std::cout << e.getName();
}

int main()
{
    printEmployee("Joe"); // we're supplying an string literal argument

    return 0;
}
```

In this version, we’ve swapped out our `Foo` class for an `Employee` class. `printEmployee` has an `Employee` parameter, and we’re passing in a C-style string literal. And we have a converting constructor: `Employee(std::string_view)`.

You might be surprised to find that this version doesn’t compile. The reason is simple: only one user-defined conversion may be applied to perform an implicit conversion, and this example requires two. First, our C-style string literal has to be converted to a `std::string_view` (using a `std::string_view` converting constructor), and then our `std::string_view` has to be converted into an `Employee` (using the `Employee(std::string_view)` converting constructor).

There are two ways to make this example work:

1. Use a `std::string_view` literal:

```cpp
int main()
{
    using namespace std::literals;
    printEmployee( "Joe"sv); // now a std::string_view literal

    return 0;
}
```

This works because only one user-defined conversion is now required (from `std::string_view` to `Employee`).

2. Explicitly construct an `Employee` rather than implicitly create one:

```cpp
int main()
{
    printEmployee(Employee{ "Joe" });

    return 0;
}
```

This latter example brings up a useful technique: it is trivial to convert an implicit conversion into an explicit definition.

# I am sorry Future Vedant.......
[Converting constructors and the explicit keyword](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/converting-constructors-and-the-explicit-keyword/)


