# Member access

Each member of a class type has a property called an **access level** that determines who can access that member.

C++ has three different access levels: _public_, _private_, and _protected_.

Whenever a member is accessed, the compiler checks whether the access level of the member permits that member to be accessed. If the access is not permitted, the compiler will generate a compilation error. This access level system is sometimes informally called **access controls**.

# The members of a struct are public by default

Members that have the _public_ access level are called _public members_. **Public members** are members of a class type that do not have any restrictions on how they can be accessed.

Public members can be accessed by other members of the same class. Notably, public members can also be accessed by **the public**, which is what we call code that exists _outside_ the members of a given class type. Examples of _the public_ include non-member functions, as well as the members of other class types.

# The members of a class are private by default

Members that have the _private_ access level are called _private members_. **Private members** are members of a class type that can only be accessed by other members of the same class.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Date // now a class instead of a struct
{
    // class members are private by default, can only be accessed by other members
    int m_year {};     // private by default
    int m_month {};    // private by default
    int m_day {};      // private by default

    void print() const // private by default
    {
        // private members can be accessed in member functions
        std::cout << m_year << '/' << m_month << '/' << m_day;
    }
};

int main()
{
    Date today { 2020, 10, 14 }; // compile error: can no longer use aggregate initialization

    // private members can not be accessed by the public
    today.m_day = 16; // compile error: the m_day member is private
    today.print();    // compile error: the print() member function is private

    return 0;
}
```

We noted that an aggregate can have “no private or protected non-static data members.” Our `Date` class has private data members (because the members of classes are private by default), so our `Date` class does not qualify as an aggregate. Therefore, we can not use aggregate initialization to initialize it any more.

# Naming your private member variables

It is a common convention to name private data members starting with an “m_” prefix. This is done for a couple of important reasons.

- First, the “m_” prefix allows us to easily differentiate data members from function parameters or local variables within a member function.And that is important because when we change the value of a data member, it persists beyond the scope of the member function (whereas changes to function parameters or local variables typically do not).
- Second, the “m_” prefix helps prevent naming collisions between private member variables and the names of local variables, function parameters, and member functions.
	- If we had named our private member `name` instead of `m_name`, then:
	- Our `name` function parameter would have shadowed the `name` private data member.
	- If we had a member function named `name`, we’d get a compile error due to a redefinition of identifier `name`.

# Setting access levels via access specifiers

We can explicitly set the access level of our members by using an **access specifier**. An access specifier sets the access level of _all members_ that follow the specifier. C++ provides three access specifiers: `public:`, `private:`, and `protected:`.

```cpp
class Date
{
// Any members defined here would default to private

public: // here's our public access specifier

    void print() const // public due to above public: specifier
    {
        // members can access other private members
        std::cout << m_year << '/' << m_month << '/' << m_day;
    }

private: // here's our private access specifier

    int m_year { 2020 };  // private due to above private: specifier
    int m_month { 14 }; // private due to above private: specifier
    int m_day { 10 };   // private due to above private: specifier
};

int main()
{
    Date d{};
    d.print();  // okay, main() allowed to access public members

    return 0;
}
```

This example compiles. Because `print()` is a public member due to the `public:` access specifier, `main()` (which is part of the public) is allowed to access it.

Because we have private members, we can not aggregate initialize `d`.

# Access level summary

Here’s a quick summary table of the different access levels:

|Access level|Access specifier|Member access|Derived class access|Public access|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Public|public:|yes|yes|yes|
|Protected|protected:|yes|yes|no|
|Private|private:|yes|no|no|

A class type is allowed to use any number of access specifiers in any order, and they can be used repeatedly (e.g. you can have some public members, then some private ones, then more public ones).

# Access level best practices for structs and classes

Structs should avoid access specifiers altogether, meaning all struct members will be public by default. We want our structs to be aggregates, and aggregates can only have public members. Using the `public:` access specifier would be redundant with the default, and using `private:` or `protected:` would make the struct a non-aggregate.

Classes should generally only have private (or protected) data members (either by using the default private access level, or the `private:` (or `protected`) access specifier).

Classes normally have public member functions (so those member functions can be used by the public after the object is created). However, occasionally member functions are made private (or protected) if they are not intended to be used by the public.

# Access levels work on a per-class basis

One nuance of C++ access levels that is often missed or misunderstood is that access to members is defined on a per-class basis, not on a per-object basis.

You already know that a member function can directly access private members (of the implicit object). However, because access levels are per-class, not per-object, a member function can also directly access the private members of ANY other object of the same class type that is in scope.

Let’s illustrate this with an example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

class Person
{
private:
    std::string m_name{};

public:
    void kisses(const Person& p) const
    {
        std::cout << m_name << " kisses " << p.m_name << '\n';
    }

    void setName(std::string_view name)
    {
        m_name = name;
    }
};

int main()
{
    Person joe;
    joe.setName("Joe");

    Person kate;
    kate.setName("Kate");

    joe.kisses(kate);

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
 
```

There are a few things to note here.

First, `m_name` has been made private, so it can only be accessed by members of the `Person` class (not the public).

Second, because our class has private members, it is not an aggregate, and we can’t use aggregate initialization to initialize our Person objects. As a workaround (until we cover a proper solution to this issue), we’ve created a public member function named `setName()` that allows us to assign a name to our Person objects.

Third, because `kisses()` is a member function, it has direct access to private member `m_name`. However, you might be surprised to see that it also has direct access to `p.m_name`! This works because `p` is a `Person` object, and `kisses()` can access the private members of any `Person` object in scope!