
# Returning data members by lvalue reference

Data members have the same lifetime as the object containing them. Since member functions are always called on an object, and that object must exist in the scope of the caller, it is generally safe for a member function to return a data member by (const) lvalue reference.

# The return type of a member function returning a reference to a data member should match the data member’s type

Returning a `std::string_view` would require a temporary `std::string_view` to be created and returned every time the function was called. That’s needlessly inefficient. If the caller wants a `std::string_view`, they can do the conversion themselves.

For getters, using `auto` to have the compiler deduce the return type from the member being returned is a useful way to ensure that no conversions occur.

# Rvalue implicit objects and return by reference

There’s one case we need to be a little careful with.

What if our implicit object is an rvalue instead (such as the return value of some function that returns by value)? Rvalue objects are destroyed at the end of the full expression in which they are created. When an rvalue object is destroyed, any references to members of that rvalue will be invalidated and left dangling, and use of such references will produce undefined behavior.

Therefore, a reference to a member of an rvalue object can only be safely used within the full expression where the rvalue object is created.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

class Employee
{
	std::string m_name{};

public:
	void setName(std::string_view name) { m_name = name; }
	const auto& getName() const { return m_name; } //  getter returns by const reference
};

// createEmployee() returns an Employee by value (which means the returned value is an rvalue)
Employee createEmployee(std::string_view name)
{
	Employee e;
	e.setName(name);
	return e;
}

int main()
{
	// Case 1: okay: use returned reference to member of rvalue class object in same expression
	std::cout << createEmployee("Frank").getName();

	// Case 2: bad: save returned reference to member of rvalue class object for use later
	const std::string& ref { createEmployee("Garbo").getName() }; // reference becomes dangling when return value of createEmployee() is destroyed
	std::cout << ref; // undefined behavior

	// Case 3: okay: copy referenced value to local variable for use later
	std::string val { createEmployee("Hans").getName() }; // makes copy of referenced member
	std::cout << val; // okay: val is independent of referenced member

	return 0;
}
```

In case 1, we call `createEmployee("Frank")`, which returns an rvalue `Employee` object. We then call `getName()` on this rvalue object, which returns a reference to `m_name`. This reference is then used immediately to print the name to the console. At this point, the full expression containing the call to `createEmployee("Frank")` ends, and the rvalue object and its members are destroyed. Since neither the rvalue object or its members are used beyond this point, this case is fine.

In case 2, we run into problems. First, `createEmployee("Garbo")` returns an rvalue object. We then call `getName()` to get a reference to the `m_name` member of this rvalue. This `m_name` member is then used to initialize `ref`. At this point, the full expression containing the call to `createEmployee("Garbo")` ends, and the rvalue object and its members are destroyed. This leaves `ref` dangling. Thus, when we use `ref` in the subsequent statement, we’re accessing a dangling reference, and undefined behavior results.

In case 3, we’re using the returned reference to initialize non-reference local variable `val`. This will cause the member being referenced to be copied into `val`. After initialization, `val` exists independently of the reference. So when the rvalue object is subsequently destroyed, `val` is not impacted by this. Thus `val` can be output in future statements without issue.

# Using member functions that return by reference safely

Let’s talk about how we can use the return values from such functions safely. The three cases in the example above illustrate the three key points:

- Prefer to use the return value of a member function that returns by reference immediately (illustrated in case 1). Since this works with both lvalue and rvalue objects, if you always do this, you will avoid trouble.
- Do not “save” a returned reference to use later (illustrated in case 2), unless you are sure the implicit object is an lvalue. If you do this with an rvalue implicit object, undefined behavior will result when you use the now-dangling reference.
- If you do need to persist a returned reference for use later and aren’t sure that the implicit object is an lvalue, using the returned reference as the initializer for a non-reference local variable, which will make a copy of the member being referenced into the local variable (illustrated in case 3).

# Do not return non-const references to private data members

Because a reference acts just like the object being referenced, a member function that returns a non-const reference provides direct access to that member (even if the member is private).

For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_value{ 4 }; // private member

public:
    auto& value() { return m_value; } // returns a non-const reference (don't do this)
};

int main()
{
    Foo f{};                // f.m_value is initialized to default value 4
    f.value() = 5;          // The equivalent of m_value = 5
    std::cout << f.value(); // prints 5

    return 0;
}
```

# Const member functions can’t return non-const references to data members

A const member function is not allowed to return a non-const reference to members. This makes sense -- a const member function is not allowed to modify the state of the object, nor is it allowed to call functions that would modify the state of the object. It should not be doing anything that might lead to the modification of the object.

If a const member function was allowed to return a non-const reference to a member, it would be handing the caller a way to directly modify that member. This violates the intent of a const member function.