
# Implementation and interfaces in class types

Let’s define what we mean by interface and implementation with regards to class types.

The **interface** of a class type defines how a user of the class type will interact with objects of the class type. Because only public members can be accessed from outside of the class type, the public members of a class type form its interface. For this reason, an interface composed of public members is sometimes called a **public interface**.

An interface is an implicit contract between the author of a class and the user of a class. If an existing interface is ever changed, any code that uses it may break. Therefore, it is important to ensure the interfaces for our class types are well-designed and stable (don’t change much).

The **implementation** of a class type consists of the code that actually makes the class behave as intended. This includes both the member variables that store data, and the bodies of the member functions that contain the program logic and manipulate the member variables.

# Data hiding (encapsulation)

In programming, **data hiding** (also called **information hiding** or **data abstraction**) is a technique used to enforce the separation of interface and implementation by hiding the implementation of a program-defined data type from users.

# How to implement data hiding

Implementing data hiding in a C++ class type is simple.

First, we ensure the data members of the class type are private (so that the user can not directly access them). The statements inside the bodies of member functions are already not directly accessible to users, so we don’t need to do anything else there.

Second, we ensure the member functions are public, so that the user can call them.

By following these rules, we force the user of a class type to manipulate objects using the public interface, and prevent them from directly accessing implementation details.\

# Data hiding make classes easier to use, and reduces complexity

# Data hiding allows us to maintain invariants

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

class Employee // members are private by default
{
    std::string m_name{};
    char m_firstInitial{};

public:
    void setName(std::string_view name)
    {
        m_name = name;
        m_firstInitial = name.front(); // use std::string::front() to get first letter of `name`
    }

    void print() const
    {
        std::cout << "Employee " << m_name << " has first initial " << m_firstInitial << '\n';
    }
};

int main()
{
    Employee e{};
    e.setName("John");
    e.print();

    e.setName("Mark");
    e.print();

    return 0;
}
```

# Data hiding allows us to do better error detection (and handling)

In the above program, the invariant that `m_firstInitial` must match the first character of `m_name` exists because `m_firstInitial` exists independently of `m_name`. We can remove this particular invariant by replacing data member `m_firstInitial` with a member function that returns the first initial:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

class Employee
{
    std::string m_name{ "John" };

public:
    void setName(std::string_view name)
    {
        m_name = name;
    }

    // use std::string::front() to get first letter of `m_name`
    char firstInitial() const { return m_name.front(); }

    void print() const
    {
        std::cout << "Employee " << m_name << " has first initial " << firstInitial() << '\n';
    }
};

int main()
{
    Employee e{}; // defaults to "John"
    e.setName("Mark");
    e.print();

    return 0;
}
```

# Data hiding makes it possible to change implementation details without breaking existing programs

Here is the encapsulated version that uses functions to access `m_value1`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Something
{
private:
    int m_value1 {};
    int m_value2 {};
    int m_value3 {};

public:
    void setValue1(int value) { m_value1 = value; }
    int getValue1() const { return m_value1; }
};

int main()
{
    Something something;
    something.setValue1(5);
    std::cout << something.getValue1() << '\n';
}
```

Now, let’s change the class’s implementation back to an array:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Something
{
private:
    int m_value[3]; // note: we changed the implementation of this class!

public:
    // We have to update any member functions to reflect the new implementation
    void setValue1(int value) { m_value[0] = value; }
    int getValue1() const { return m_value[0]; }
};

int main()
{
    // But our programs that use the class do not need to be updated!
    Something something;
    something.setValue1(5);
    std::cout << something.getValue1() << '\n';
}
```

Because we did not change the public interface of the class, our program that uses that interface did not need to change at all, and still functions identically.

# Classes with interfaces are easier to debug

And finally, encapsulation can help you debug a program when something goes wrong. Often when a program does not work correctly, it is because one of our member variables has been given an incorrect value. If everyone is able to set the member variable directly, tracking down which piece of code actually modified the member variable to the wrong value can be difficult. This can involve breakpointing every statement that modifies the member variable -- and there can be lots of them.

However, if a member can only be changed through a single member function, then you can simply breakpoint that single function and watch as each caller changes the value. This can make it much easier to determine who the culprit is.

# Prefer non-member functions to member functions

This has numerous benefits:

- Non-member functions are not part of the interface of your class. Thus, the interface of your class will be smaller and more straightforward, making the class easier to understand.
- Non-member functions enforce encapsulation, as such functions must work through the public interface of the class. There is no temptation to access the implementation directly just because it is convenient.
- Non-member functions do not need to be considered when making changes to the implementation of a class (so long as the interface doesn’t change in an incompatible way).
- Non-member functions tend to be easier to debug.
- Non-member functions containing application specific data and logic can be separated from the reusable portions of the class.

# The order of class member declaration

There are two schools of thought here:

- List your private members first, and then list your public member functions. This follows the traditional style of declare-before-use. Anybody looking at your class code will see how you’ve defined your data members before they are used, which can make reading through and understanding implementation details easier.
- List your public members first, and put your private members down at the bottom. Because someone who uses your class is interested in the public interface, putting your public members first makes the information they need up top, and puts the implementation details (which are least important) last.