When a class type is an aggregate, we can use aggregate initialization to initialize the class type directly.

However, as soon as we make any member variables private (to hide our data), our class type is no longer an aggregate (because aggregates cannot have private members). And that means we’re no longer able to use aggregate initialization.

Not allowing class types with private members to be initialized via aggregate initialization makes sense for a number of reasons:

- Aggregate initialization requires knowing about the implementation of the class (since you have to know what the members are, and what order they were defined in), which we’re intentionally trying to avoid when we hide our data members.
- If our class had some kind of invariant, we’d be relying on the user to initialize the class in a way that preserves the invariant.

# Constructors

A **constructor** is a special member function that is automatically called after a non-aggregate class type object is created.

When a non-aggregate class type object is defined, the compiler looks to see if it can find an accessible constructor that is a match for the initialization values provided by the caller (if any).

- If an accessible matching constructor is found, memory for the object is allocated, and then the constructor function is called.
- If no accessible matching constructor can be found, a compilation error will be generated.

Beyond determining how an object may be created, constructors generally perform two functions:

- They typically perform initialization of any member variables (via a member initialization list)
- They may perform other setup functions (via statements in the body of the constructor). This might include things such as error checking the initialization values, opening a file or database, etc…

## Naming constructors

Unlike normal member functions, constructors have specific rules for how they must be named:

- Constructors must have the same name as the class (with the same capitalization). For template classes, this name excludes the template parameters.
- Constructors have no return type (not even `void`).

# A basic constructor example

Let’s add a basic constructor to our example above:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x {};
    int m_y {};

public:
    Foo(int x, int y) // here's our constructor function that takes two initializers
    {
        std::cout << "Foo(" << x << ", " << y << ") constructed\n";
    }

    void print() const
    {
        std::cout << "Foo(" << m_x << ", " << m_y << ")\n";
    }
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo{ 6, 7 }; // calls Foo(int, int) constructor
    foo.print();

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
Foo(6, 7) constructed
Foo(0, 0)
```

When the compiler sees the definition `Foo foo{ 6, 7 }`, it looks for a matching `Foo` constructor that will accept two `int` arguments. `Foo(int, int)` is a match, so the compiler will allow the definition.

At runtime, when `foo` is instantiated, memory for `foo` is allocated, and then the `Foo(int, int)` constructor is called with parameter `x` initialized to `6` and parameter `y` initialized to `7`. The body of the constructor function then executes and prints `Foo(6, 7) constructed`.

When we call the `print()` member function, you’ll note that members `m_x` and `m_y` have value 0. This is because although our `Foo(int, int)` constructor function was called, it did not actually initialize the members.

# Constructor implicit conversion of arguments

The `Foo(int, int)` constructor will match any call whose arguments are implicitly convertible to `int`:

```cpp
class Foo
{
public:
    Foo(int x, int y)
    {
    }
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo{ 'a', true }; // will match Foo(int, int) constructor

    return 0;
}
```

# Constructors should not be const

A constructor needs to be able to initialize the object being constructed -- therefore, a constructor must not be const.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Something
{
private:
    int m_x{};

public:
    Something() // constructors must be non-const
    {
        m_x = 5; // okay to modify members in non-const constructor
    }

    int getX() const { return m_x; } // const
};

int main()
{
    const Something s{}; // const object, implicitly invokes (non-const) constructor

    std::cout << s.getX(); // prints 5

    return 0;
}
```

Normally a non-const member function can’t be invoked on a const object. However, because the constructor is invoked implicitly, a non-const constructor can be invoked on a const object.

# Constructors vs setters

Constructors are designed to initialize an entire object at the point of instantiation. Setters are designed to assign a value to a single member of an existing object.

# Member initialization via a member initialization list

To have a constructor initialize members, we do so using a **member initializer list** (often called a “member initialization list”). Do not confuse this with the similarly named “initializer list” that is used to initialize aggregates with a list of values.

In the following example, our `Foo(int, int)` constructor has been updated to use a member initializer list to initialize `m_x`, and `m_y`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x {};
    int m_y {};

public:
    Foo(int x, int y)
        : m_x { x }, m_y { y } // here's our member initialization list
    {
        std::cout << "Foo(" << x << ", " << y << ") constructed\n";
    }

    void print() const
    {
        std::cout << "Foo(" << m_x << ", " << m_y << ")\n";
    }
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo{ 6, 7 };
    foo.print();

    return 0;
}
```

# Member initializer list formatting

C++ provides a lot of freedom to format your member initializer lists as you prefer, as it doesn’t care where you put your colon, commas, or whitespace.

The following styles are all valid (and you’re likely to see all three in practice):

```cpp
Foo(int x, int y) : m_x { x }, m_y { y }
{
}
```

```cpp
Foo(int x, int y) :
    m_x { x },
    m_y { y }
{
}
```

```cpp
Foo(int x, int y)
    : m_x { x }
    , m_y { y }
{
}
```

# Member initialization order 

Because the C++ standard says so, the members in a member initializer list are always initialized in the order in which they are defined inside the class (not in the order they are defined in the member initializer list).

Consider the following example:

```cpp
public:
    Foo(int x, int y)
        : m_y{ std::max(x, y) }, m_x{ m_y } // issue on this line
    {
    }
```

# Member initializer list vs default member initializers

Members can be initialized in a few different ways:

- If a member is listed in the member initializer list, that initialization value is used
- Otherwise, if the member has a default member initializer, that initialization value is used
- Otherwise, the member is default initialized.

Here’s an example showing all three initialization methods:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x{};    // default member initializer (will be ignored)
    int m_y{ 2 }; // default member initializer (will be used)
    int m_z;      // no initializer

public:
    Foo(int x)
        : m_x{ x } // member initializer list
    {
        std::cout << "Foo constructed\n";
    }

    void print() const
    {
        std::cout << "Foo(" << m_x << ", " << m_y << ", " << m_z << ")\n";
    }
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo{ 6 };
    foo.print();

    return 0;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this output:

```Output
Foo constructed
Foo(6, 2, -858993460)
```

# Constructor function bodies

The bodies of constructors functions are most often left empty. This is because we primarily use constructor for initialization, which is done via the member initializer list. If that is all we need to do, then we don’t need any statements in the body of the constructor.

However, because the statements in the body of the constructor execute after the member initializer list has executed, we can add statements to do any other setup tasks required. In the above examples, we print something to the console to show that the constructor executed, but we could do other things like open a file or database, allocate memory, etc…