
A **default constructor** is a constructor that accepts no arguments. Typically, this is a constructor that has been defined with no parameters.

Here is an example of a class that has a default constructor:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
public:
    Foo() // default constructor
    {
        std::cout << "Foo default constructed\n";
    }
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo{}; // No initialization values, calls Foo's default constructor

    return 0;
}
```

# Value initialization vs default initialization for class types

If a class type has a default constructor, both value initialization and default initialization will call the default constructor. Thus, for such a class such as the `Foo` class in the example above, the following are essentially equivalent:

```cpp
Foo foo{}; // value initialization, calls Foo() default constructor
Foo foo2;  // default initialization, calls Foo() default constructor
```

# Constructors with default arguments

As with all functions, the rightmost parameters of constructors can have default arguments.

For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x { };
    int m_y { };

public:
    Foo(int x=0, int y=0) // has default arguments
        : m_x { x }
        , m_y { y }
    {
        std::cout << "Foo(" << m_x << ", " << m_y << ") constructed\n";
    }
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo1{};     // calls Foo(int, int) constructor using default arguments
    Foo foo2{6, 7}; // calls Foo(int, int) constructor

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
Foo(0, 0) constructed
Foo(6, 7) constructed
```

If all of the parameters in a constructor have default arguments, the constructor is a default constructor (because it can be called with no arguments).

# Overloaded constructors

Because constructors are functions, they can be overloaded. That is, we can have multiple constructors so that we can construct objects in different ways:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x {};
    int m_y {};

public:
    Foo() // default constructor
    {
        std::cout << "Foo constructed\n";
    }

    Foo(int x, int y) // non-default constructor
        : m_x { x }, m_y { y }
    {
        std::cout << "Foo(" << m_x << ", " << m_y << ") constructed\n";
    }
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo1{};     // Calls Foo() constructor
    Foo foo2{6, 7}; // Calls Foo(int, int) constructor

    return 0;
}
```

A corollary of the above is that a class should only have one default constructor. If more than one default constructor is provided, the compiler will be unable to disambiguate which should be used

# An implicit default constructor

If a non-aggregate class type object has no user-declared constructors, the compiler will generate a public default constructor (so that the class can be value or default initialized). This constructor is called an **implicit default constructor**.

Consider the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x{};
    int m_y{};

    // Note: no constructors declared
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo{};

    return 0;
}
```

This class has no user-declared constructors, so the compiler will generate an implicit default constructor for us. That constructor will be used to instantiate `foo{}`.

The implicit default constructor is equivalent to a constructor that has no parameters, no member initializer list, and no statements in the body of the constructor.

# Using `= default` to generate an explicitly defaulted default constructor

In cases where we would write a default constructor that is equivalent to the implicitly generated default constructor, we can instead tell the compiler to generate a default constructor for us. This constructor is called an **explicitly defaulted default constructor**, and it can be generated by using the `= default` syntax:

```cpp
class Foo
{
private:
    int m_x {};
    int m_y {};

public:
    Foo() = default; // generates an explicitly defaulted default constructor
}
```

Prefer an explicitly defaulted default constructor (`= default`) over a default constructor with an empty body.

# Explicitly defaulted default constructor vs empty user-defined constructor

There is at least one case where the explicitly defaulted default constructor behaves differently than an empty user-defined constructor. When value initializing a class, if the class has a user-defined default constructor, the object will be default initialized. However, if the class has a default constructor that is not user-defined (that is, either an implicitly-defined constructor, or a default constructor created using `= default`), the object will be zero-initialized before being default initialized.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class User
{
private:
    int m_a; // note: no default initialization value
    int m_b {};

public:
    User() {} // user-defined empty constructor

    int a() const { return m_a; }
    int b() const { return m_b; }
};

class Default
{
private:
    int m_a; // note: no default initialization value
    int m_b {};

public:
    Default() = default; // explicitly defaulted default constructor

    int a() const { return m_a; }
    int b() const { return m_b; }
};


int main()
{
    User user{}; // default initialized
    std::cout << user.a() << ' ' << user.b() << '\n';

    Default def{}; // zero initialized, then default initialized
    std::cout << def.a() << ' ' << def.b() << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this prints:

```Output
782510864 0
0 0
```

# Only create a default constructor when it makes sense

A default constructor allows us to create objects of a non-aggregate class type with no user-provided initialization values. Thus, a class should only provide a default constructor when it makes sense for objects of a class type to be created using all default values.