Constructors are not designed to be called directly from the body of another function (including other constructors)!

# Delegating constructors

Constructors are allowed to delegate (transfer responsibility for) initialization to another constructor from the same class type. This process is sometimes called **constructor chaining** and such constructors are called **delegating constructors**.

To make one constructor delegate initialization to another constructor, simply call the constructor in the member initializer list. Applied to our example above:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

class Employee
{
private:
    std::string m_name{};
    int m_id{ 0 };

public:
    Employee(std::string_view name)
        : Employee{ name, 0 } // delegate initialization to Employee(std::string_view, int) constructor
    {
    }

    Employee(std::string_view name, int id)
        : m_name{ name }, m_id{ id } // actually initializes the members
    {
        std::cout << "Employee " << m_name << " created\n";
    }

};

int main()
{
    Employee e1{ "James" };
    Employee e2{ "Dave", 42 };
}
```

A few additional notes about delegating constructors. 
- First, a constructor that delegates to another constructor is not allowed to do any member initialization itself. So your constructors can delegate or initialize, but not both.
- Second, it’s possible for one constructor to delegate to another constructor, which delegates back to the first constructor. This forms an infinite loop, and will cause your program to run out of stack space and crash. You can avoid this by ensuring all of your constructors resolve to a non-delegating constructor.

# Reducing constructors using default arguments

Default values can also sometimes be used to reduce multiple constructors into fewer constructors. For example, by putting a default value on our `id` parameter, we can create a single `Employee` constructor that requires a name argument but will optionally accept an id argument:

```cpp
public:

    Employee(std::string_view name, int id = 0) // default argument for id
        : m_name{ name }, m_id{ id }
    {
        std::cout << "Employee " << m_name << " created\n";
    }
```
