
**Compound data types** (also sometimes called **composite data types**) are data types that can be constructed from fundamental data types (or other compound data types). Each compound data type has its own unique properties as well.

C++ supports the following compound types:

- Functions
- Arrays
- Pointer types:
    - Pointer to object
    - Pointer to function
- Pointer to member types:
    - Pointer to data member
    - Pointer to member function
- Reference types:
    - L-value references
    - R-value references
- Enumerated types:
    - Unscoped enumerations
    - Scoped enumerations
- Class types:
    - Structs
    - Classes
    - Unions

# Value categories (lvalues and rvalues)

## The properties of an expression

To help determine how expressions should evaluate and where they can be used, all expressions in C++ have two properties: a type and a value category.

### The type of an expression

The type of an expression is equivalent to the type of the value, object, or function that results from the evaluated expression.

### The value category of an expression

The **value category** of an expression (or subexpression) indicates whether an expression resolves to a value, a function, or an object of some kind.

Prior to C++11, there were only two possible value categories: `lvalue` and `rvalue`.

In C++11, three additional value categories (`glvalue`, `prvalue`, and `xvalue`) were added to support a new feature called `move semantics`.

#### Lvalue and rvalue expressions

An **lvalue** (pronounced “ell-value”, short for “left value” or “locator value”, and sometimes written as “l-value”) is an expression that evaluates to an identifiable object or function (or bit-field).
	Since the introduction of constants into the language, lvalues come in two subtypes: a **modifiable lvalue** is an lvalue whose value can be modified. A **non-modifiable lvalue** is an lvalue whose value can’t be modified (because the lvalue is const or constexpr).

An **rvalue** (pronounced “arr-value”, short for “right value”, and sometimes written as `r-value`) is an expression that is not an lvalue. Rvalue expressions evaluate to a value. Commonly seen rvalues include literals (except C-style string literals, which are lvalues) and the return value of functions and operators that return by value. Rvalues aren’t identifiable (meaning they have to be used immediately), and only exist within the scope of the expression in which they are used.

```cpp
int return5()
{
    return 5;
}

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 }; // 5 is an rvalue expression
    const double d{ 1.2 }; // 1.2 is an rvalue expression

    int y { x }; // x is a modifiable lvalue expression
    const double e { d }; // d is a non-modifiable lvalue expression
    int z { return5() }; // return5() is an rvalue expression (since the result is returned by value)

    int w { x + 1 }; // x + 1 is an rvalue expression
    int q { static_cast<int>(d) }; // the result of static casting d to an int is an rvalue expression

    return 0;
}
```

```cpp
int main()
{
    int x{};

    // Assignment requires the left operand to be a modifiable lvalue expression and the right operand to be an rvalue expression
    x = 5; // valid: x is a modifiable lvalue expression and 5 is an rvalue expression
    5 = x; // error: 5 is an rvalue expression and x is a modifiable lvalue expression

    return 0;
}
```

#### Lvalue to rvalue conversion

Let's take look at this example:
```cpp
int main()
{
    int x{ 1 };
    int y{ 2 };

    x = y; // y is a modifiable lvalue, not an rvalue, but this is legal

    return 0;
}
```

In this case, `y` is an lvalue expression, but it undergoes an lvalue-to-rvalue conversion, which evaluates to the value of `y` (2), which is then assigned to `x`.