In C++, a **reference** is an alias for an existing object. Once a reference has been defined, any operation on the reference is applied to the object being referenced.

Modern C++ contains two types of references: `lvalue references`, and `rvalue references`.

# Lvalue reference types

An **lvalue reference** (commonly just called a `reference` since prior to C++11 there was only one type of reference) acts as an alias for an existing lvalue (such as a variable).

To declare an lvalue reference type, we use an ampersand (&) in the type declaration:

```cpp
int      // a normal int type
int&     // an lvalue reference to an int object
double&  // an lvalue reference to a double object
```

## Lvalue reference variables

An **lvalue reference variable** is a variable that acts as a reference to an lvalue (usually another variable).

To create an lvalue reference variable, we simply define a variable with an lvalue reference type: 
```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };    // x is a normal integer variable
    int& ref { x }; // ref is an lvalue reference variable that can now be used as an alias for variable x

    std::cout << x << '\n';  // print the value of x (5)
    std::cout << ref << '\n'; // print the value of x via ref (5)

    return 0;
}
```

## Modifying values through an lvalue reference

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 5 }; // normal integer variable
    int& ref { x }; // ref is now an alias for variable x

    std::cout << x << ref << '\n'; // print 55

    x = 6; // x now has value 6

    std::cout << x << ref << '\n'; // prints 66

    ref = 7; // the object being referenced (x) now has value 7

    std::cout << x << ref << '\n'; // prints 77

    return 0;
}
```

## Initialization of lvalue references

Much like constants, all references must be initialized.

```cpp
int main()
{
    int& invalidRef;   // error: references must be initialized

    int x { 5 };
    int& ref { x }; // okay: reference to int is bound to int variable

    return 0;
}
```

When a reference is initialized with an object (or function), we say it is **bound** to that object (or function). The process by which such a reference is bound is called **reference binding**. The object (or function) being referenced is sometimes called the **referent**.

Lvalue references must be bound to a _modifiable_ lvalue.

```cpp
int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    int& ref { x }; // valid: lvalue reference bound to a modifiable lvalue

    const int y { 5 };
    int& invalidRef { y };  // invalid: can't bind to a non-modifiable lvalue
    int& invalidRef2 { 0 }; // invalid: can't bind to an rvalue

    return 0;
}
```

For this reason, lvalue references are occasionally called **lvalue references to non-const** (sometimes shortened to **non-const reference**).

In most cases, the type of the reference must match the type of the referent (there are some exceptions to this rule that we’ll discuss when we get into inheritance):
```cpp
int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    int& ref { x }; // okay: reference to int is bound to int variable

    double y { 6.0 };
    int& invalidRef { y }; // invalid; reference to int cannot bind to double variable
    double& invalidRef2 { x }; // invalid: reference to double cannot bind to int variable

    return 0;
}
```

Lvalue references to `void` are disallowed (what would be the point?).

## References can’t be reseated (changed to refer to another object)

Once initialized, a reference in C++ cannot be **reseated**, meaning it cannot be changed to reference another object.

Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    int y { 6 };

    int& ref { x }; // ref is now an alias for x

    ref = y; // assigns 6 (the value of y) to x (the object being referenced by ref)
    // The above line does NOT change ref into a reference to variable y!

    std::cout << x << '\n'; // user is expecting this to print 5

    return 0;
}
```

Perhaps surprisingly, this prints:

```Output
6
```

When a reference is evaluated in an expression, it resolves to the object it’s referencing. So `ref = y` doesn’t change `ref` to now reference `y`. Rather, because `ref` is an alias for `x`, the expression evaluates as if it was written `x = y` -- and since `y` evaluates to value `6`, `x` is assigned the value `6`.

## Lvalue reference scope and duration

Reference variables follow the same scoping and duration rules that normal variables do.

## References and referents have independent lifetimes

the lifetime of a reference and the lifetime of its referent are independent. In other words, both of the following are true:

- A reference can be destroyed before the object it is referencing.
- The object being referenced can be destroyed before the reference.

When a reference is destroyed before the referent, the referent is not impacted. The following program demonstrates this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };

    {
        int& ref { x };   // ref is a reference to x
        std::cout << ref << '\n'; // prints value of ref (5)
    } // ref is destroyed here -- x is unaware of this

    std::cout << x << '\n'; // prints value of x (5)

    return 0;
} // x destroyed here
```

## Dangling references

When an object being referenced is destroyed before a reference to it, the reference is left referencing an object that no longer exists. Such a reference is called a **dangling reference**. Accessing a dangling reference leads to undefined behavior.

## References aren’t objects

Perhaps surprisingly, references are not objects in C++. A reference is not required to exist or occupy storage. If possible, the compiler will optimize references away by replacing all occurrences of a reference with the referent. However, this isn’t always possible, and in such cases, references may require storage.

Because references aren’t objects, they can’t be used anywhere an object is required (e.g. you can’t have a reference to a reference, since an lvalue reference must reference an identifiable object). In cases where you need a reference that is an object or a reference that can be reseated, `std::reference_wrapper` provides a solution.

## Lvalue references to const

By using the `const` keyword when declaring an lvalue reference, we tell an lvalue reference to treat the object it is referencing as const. Such a reference is called an **lvalue reference to a const value** (sometimes called a **reference to const** or a **const reference**).

Lvalue references to const can bind to non-modifiable lvalues:

```cpp
int main()
{
    const int x { 5 };    // x is a non-modifiable lvalue
    const int& ref { x }; // okay: ref is a an lvalue reference to a const value

    return 0;
}
```

Because lvalue references to const treat the object they are referencing as const, they can be used to access but not modify the value being referenced.

## Initializing an lvalue reference to const with a modifiable lvalue

Lvalue references to const can also bind to modifiable lvalues. In such a case, the object being referenced is treated as const when accessed through the reference (even though the underlying object is non-const):

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };          // x is a modifiable lvalue
    const int& ref { x }; // okay: we can bind a const reference to a modifiable lvalue

    std::cout << ref << '\n'; // okay: we can access the object through our const reference
    ref = 7;                  // error: we can not modify an object through a const reference

    x = 6;                // okay: x is a modifiable lvalue, we can still modify it through the original identifier

    return 0;
}
```

	## Initializing an lvalue reference to const with an rvalue

Perhaps surprisingly, lvalues references to const can also bind to rvalues:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    const int& ref { 5 }; // okay: 5 is an rvalue

    std::cout << ref << '\n'; // prints 5

    return 0;
}
```

When this happens, a temporary object is created and initialized with the rvalue, and the reference to const is bound to that temporary object.

## Const references bound to temporary objects extend the lifetime of the temporary object

Temporary objects are normally destroyed at the end of the expression in which they are created.

However, consider what would happen in the above example if the temporary object created to hold rvalue `5` was destroyed at the end of the expression that initializes `ref`. Reference `ref` would be left dangling (referencing an object that had been destroyed), and we’d get undefined behavior when we tried to access `ref`.

To avoid dangling references in such cases, C++ has a special rule: When a const lvalue reference is _directly_ bound to a temporary object, the lifetime of the temporary object is extended to match the lifetime of the reference.

[[C++/EXTRA#Constexpr lvalue references]]

# Pass by lvalue reference

One way to avoid making an expensive copy of an argument when calling a function is to use `pass by reference` instead of `pass by value`. When using **pass by reference**, we declare a function parameter as a reference type (or const reference type) rather than as a normal type. When the function is called, each reference parameter is bound to the appropriate argument. Because the reference acts as an alias for the argument, no copy of the argument is made.

Here’s the same example as above, using pass by reference instead of pass by value:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

void printValue(std::string& y) // type changed to std::string&
{
    std::cout << y << '\n';
} // y is destroyed here

int main()
{
    std::string x { "Hello, world!" };

    printValue(x); // x is now passed by reference into reference parameter y (inexpensive)

    return 0;
}
```

## Pass by reference allows us to change the value of an argument

A reference acts identically to the object being referenced, when using pass by reference, any changes made to the reference parameter _will_ affect the argument:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void addOne(int& y) // y is bound to the actual object x
{
    ++y; // this modifies the actual object x
}

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };

    std::cout << "value = " << x << '\n';

    addOne(x);

    std::cout << "value = " << x << '\n'; // x has been modified

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
value = 5
value = 6
```

## Pass by reference can only accept modifiable lvalue arguments

Because a reference to a non-const value can only bind to a modifiable lvalue (essentially a non-const variable), this means that pass by reference only works with arguments that are modifiable lvalues. In practical terms, this significantly limits the usefulness of pass by reference to non-const, as it means we can not pass const variables or literals. For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printValue(int& y) // y only accepts modifiable lvalues
{
    std::cout << y << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    printValue(x); // ok: x is a modifiable lvalue

    const int z { 5 };
    printValue(z); // error: z is a non-modifiable lvalue

    printValue(5); // error: 5 is an rvalue

    return 0;
}
```

## Pass by const lvalue reference

Unlike a reference to non-const (which can only bind to modifiable lvalues), a reference to const can bind to modifiable lvalues, non-modifiable lvalues, and rvalues. Therefore, if we make a reference parameter const, then it will be able to bind to any type of argument:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printValue(const int& y) // y is now a const reference
{
    std::cout << y << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    printValue(x); // ok: x is a modifiable lvalue

    const int z { 5 };
    printValue(z); // ok: z is a non-modifiable lvalue

    printValue(5); // ok: 5 is a literal rvalue

    return 0;
}
```

Passing by const reference offers the same primary benefit as pass by reference (avoiding making a copy of the argument), while also guaranteeing that the function can _not_ change the value being referenced.

## Mixing pass by value and pass by reference

A function with multiple parameters can determine whether each parameter is passed by value or passed by reference individually.

For example:

```cpp
#include <string>

void foo(int a, int& b, const std::string& c)
{
}

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    const std::string s { "Hello, world!" };

    foo(5, x, s);

    return 0;
}
```

In the above example, the first argument is passed by value, the second by reference, and the third by const reference.

## When to pass by (const) reference

Because class types can be expensive to copy (sometimes significantly so), class types are usually passed by const reference instead of by value to avoid making an expensive copy of the argument. Fundamental types are cheap to copy, so they are typically passed by value.
[The cost of pass by value vs pass by reference](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/pass-by-const-lvalue-reference/#:~:text=std%3A%3Avector.-,The%20cost%20of%20pass%20by%20value%20vs%20pass%20by%20reference,-Advanced)
## For function parameters, prefer `std::string_view` over `const std::string&` in most cases

In most cases, `std::string_view` is the better choice, as it can handle a wider range of argument types efficiently.

```cpp
void doSomething(const std::string&);
void doSomething(std::string_view);   // prefer this in most cases
```

There are a few cases where using a `const std::string&` parameter may be more appropriate:

- If you’re using C++14 or older, `std::string_view` isn’t available.
- If your function needs to call some other function that takes a C-style string or `std::string` parameter, then `const std::string&` may be a better choice, as `std::string_view` is not guaranteed to be null-terminated (something that C-style string functions expect) and does not efficiently convert back to a `std::string`.

[Why `std::string_view` parameters are more efficient than `const std::string&`](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/pass-by-const-lvalue-reference/#:~:text=Why%20std%3A%3Astring_view%20parameters%20are%20more%20efficient%20than%20const%20std%3A%3Astring%26%20Advanced)

