# The address-of operator (&)

Although the memory addresses used by variables aren’t exposed to us by default, we do have access to this information. The **address-of operator** (&) returns the memory address of its operand. This is pretty straightforward:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 };
    std::cout << x << '\n';  // print the value of variable x
    std::cout << &x << '\n'; // print the memory address of variable x

    return 0;
}
```

For objects that use more than one byte of memory, address-of will return the memory address of the first byte used by the object.

# The dereference operator (\*)

The most useful thing we can do with an address is access the value stored at that address. The **dereference operator** (*) (also occasionally called the **indirection operator**) returns the value at a given memory address as an lvalue:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 };
    std::cout << x << '\n';  // print the value of variable x
    std::cout << &x << '\n'; // print the memory address of variable x

    std::cout << *(&x) << '\n'; // print the value at the memory address of variable x (parentheses not required, but make it easier to read)

    return 0;
}
```

# Pointers

A **pointer** is an object that holds a _memory address_ (typically of another variable) as its value. This allows us to store the address of some other object to use later.

Much like reference types are declared using an ampersand (&) character, pointer types are declared using an asterisk (*):

```cpp
int;  // a normal int
int&; // an lvalue reference to an int value

int*; // a pointer to an int value (holds the address of an integer value)
```

## Pointer initialization

Like normal variables, pointers are _not_ initialized by default. A pointer that has not been initialized is sometimes called a **wild pointer**. Wild pointers contain a garbage address.

```cpp
int main()
{
    int x{ 5 };

    int* ptr;        // an uninitialized pointer (holds a garbage address)
    int* ptr2{};     // a null pointer (we'll discuss these in the next lesson)
    int* ptr3{ &x }; // a pointer initialized with the address of variable x

    return 0;
}
```

Since pointers hold addresses, when we initialize or assign a value to a pointer, that value has to be an address. Typically, pointers are used to hold the address of another variable (which we can get using the address-of operator (&)).

Once we have a pointer holding the address of another object, we can then use the dereference operator (*) to access the value at that address. For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 };
    std::cout << x << '\n'; // print the value of variable x

    int* ptr{ &x }; // ptr holds the address of x
    std::cout << *ptr << '\n'; // use dereference operator to print the value at the address that ptr is holding (which is x's address)

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
5
5
```

Much like the type of a reference has to match the type of object being referred to, the type of the pointer has to match the type of the object being pointed to:

```cpp
int main()
{
    int i{ 5 };
    double d{ 7.0 };

    int* iPtr{ &i };     // ok: a pointer to an int can point to an int object
    int* iPtr2 { &d };   // not okay: a pointer to an int can't point to a double object
    double* dPtr{ &d };  // ok: a pointer to a double can point to a double object
    double* dPtr2{ &i }; // not okay: a pointer to a double can't point to an int object

    return 0;
}
```

With one exception that we’ll discuss next lesson, initializing a pointer with a literal value is disallowed:

```cpp
int* ptr{ 5 }; // not okay
int* ptr{ 0x0012FF7C }; // not okay, 0x0012FF7C is treated as an integer literal
```

# Pointers and assignment

We can use assignment with pointers in two different ways:

1. To change what the pointer is pointing at (by assigning the pointer a new address)
2. To change the value being pointed at (by assigning the dereferenced pointer a new value)

# Pointers behave much like lvalue references

Pointers and lvalue references behave similarly. Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 };
    int& ref { x };  // get a reference to x
    int* ptr { &x }; // get a pointer to x

    std::cout << x;
    std::cout << ref;  // use the reference to print x's value (5)
    std::cout << *ptr << '\n'; // use the pointer to print x's value (5)

    ref = 6; // use the reference to change the value of x
    std::cout << x;
    std::cout << ref;  // use the reference to print x's value (6)
    std::cout << *ptr << '\n'; // use the pointer to print x's value (6)

    *ptr = 7; // use the pointer to change the value of x
    std::cout << x;
    std::cout << ref;  // use the reference to print x's value (7)
    std::cout << *ptr << '\n'; // use the pointer to print x's value (7)

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
555
666
777
```

There are some other differences between pointers and references worth mentioning:

- References must be initialized, pointers are not required to be initialized (but should be).
- References are not objects, pointers are.
- References can not be reseated (changed to reference something else), pointers can change what they are pointing at.
- References must always be bound to an object, pointers can point to nothing (we’ll see an example of this in the next lesson).
- References are “safe” (outside of dangling references), pointers are inherently dangerous (we’ll also discuss this in the next lesson).

# The address-of operator returns a pointer

It’s worth noting that the address-of operator (&) doesn’t return the address of its operand as a literal. Instead, it returns a pointer containing the address of the operand, whose type is derived from the argument (e.g. taking the address of an `int` will return the address in an `int` pointer).

We can see this in the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo>

int main()
{
	int x{ 4 };
	std::cout << typeid(&x).name() << '\n'; // print the type of &x

	return 0;
}
```

On Visual Studio, this printed:

```Output
int *
```

>With gcc, this prints “pi” (pointer to int) instead. Because the result of typeid().name() is compiler-dependent, your compiler may print something different, but it will have the same meaning.

# The size of pointers

The size of a pointer is dependent upon the architecture the executable is compiled for -- a 32-bit executable uses 32-bit memory addresses -- consequently, a pointer on a 32-bit machine is 32 bits (4 bytes). With a 64-bit executable, a pointer would be 64 bits (8 bytes). Note that this is true regardless of the size of the object being pointed to:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main() // assume a 32-bit application
{
    char* chPtr{};        // chars are 1 byte
    int* iPtr{};          // ints are usually 4 bytes
    long double* ldPtr{}; // long doubles are usually 8 or 12 bytes

    std::cout << sizeof(chPtr) << '\n'; // prints 4
    std::cout << sizeof(iPtr) << '\n';  // prints 4
    std::cout << sizeof(ldPtr) << '\n'; // prints 4

    return 0;
}
```

The size of the pointer is always the same. This is because a pointer is just a memory address, and the number of bits needed to access a memory address is constant.

# Dangling pointers

A **dangling pointer** is a pointer that is holding the address of an object that is no longer valid

# Conclusion 

Pointers are variables that hold a memory address. They can be dereferenced using the dereference operator (*) to retrieve the value at the address they are holding. Dereferencing a wild or dangling (or null) pointer will result in undefined behavior and will probably crash your application.

Pointers are both more flexible than references and more dangerous.