
Besides a memory address, there is one additional value that a pointer can hold: a null value. A **null value** (often shortened to **null**) is a special value that means something has no value. When a pointer is holding a null value, it means the pointer is not pointing at anything. Such a pointer is called a **null pointer**.

The easiest way to create a null pointer is to use value initialization:

```cpp
int main()
{
    int* ptr {}; // ptr is now a null pointer, and is not holding an address

    return 0;
}
```

# The nullptr keyword

Much like the keywords `true` and `false` represent Boolean literal values, the **nullptr** keyword represents a null pointer literal. We can use `nullptr` to explicitly initialize or assign a pointer a null value.

```cpp
int main()
{
    int* ptr { nullptr }; // can use nullptr to initialize a pointer to be a null pointer

    int value { 5 };
    int* ptr2 { &value }; // ptr2 is a valid pointer
    ptr2 = nullptr; // Can assign nullptr to make the pointer a null pointer

    someFunction(nullptr); // we can also pass nullptr to a function that has a pointer parameter

    return 0;
}
```

# Dereferencing a null pointer results in undefined behavior

Much like dereferencing a dangling (or wild) pointer leads to undefined behavior, dereferencing a null pointer also leads to undefined behavior. In most cases, it will crash your application.

# Checking for null pointers

We can use a conditional to test whether a pointer has value `nullptr` or not:

```cpp
 if (ptr == nullptr) // explicit test for equivalence
        std::cout << "ptr is null\n";
```

Pointers will also implicitly convert to Boolean values: a null pointer converts to Boolean value `false`, and a non-null pointer converts to Boolean value `true`. This allows us to skip explicitly testing for `nullptr` and just use the implicit conversion to Boolean to test whether a pointer is a null pointer.

The following program is equivalent to the prior one:
```cpp
 if (ptr) // implicit conversion to Boolean
        std::cout << "ptr is non-null\n";
```

# Use nullptr to avoid dangling pointers

We can easily avoid dereferencing a null pointer by using a conditional to ensure a pointer is non-null before trying to dereference it:

```cpp
// Assume ptr is some pointer that may or may not be a null pointer
if (ptr) // if ptr is not a null pointer
    std::cout << *ptr << '\n'; // okay to dereference
else
    // do something else that doesn't involve dereferencing ptr (print an error message, do nothing at all, etc...)
```

Because there is no way to detect whether a pointer is dangling, we need to avoid having any dangling pointers in our program in the first place. We do that by ensuring that any pointer that is not pointing at a valid object is set to `nullptr`.

# Legacy null pointer literals: 0 and NULL

 In the context of a pointer, the literal `0` is specially defined to mean a null value, and is the only time you can assign an integral literal to a pointer.

```cpp
int main()
{
    float* ptr { 0 };  // ptr is now a null pointer (for example only, don't do this)

    float* ptr2; // ptr2 is uninitialized
    ptr2 = 0; // ptr2 is now a null pointer (for example only, don't do this)

    return 0;
}
```

There is a preprocessor macro named `NULL` (defined in the \<cstddef> header). This macro is inherited from C, where it is commonly used to indicate a null pointer.

```cpp
#include <cstddef> // for NULL

int main()
{
    double* ptr { NULL }; // ptr is a null pointer

    double* ptr2; // ptr2 is uninitialized
    ptr2 = NULL; // ptr2 is now a null pointer

    return 0;
}
```

# Favor references over pointers whenever possible

Pointers and references both give us the ability to access some other object indirectly.

Pointers have the additional abilities of being able to change what they are pointing at, and to be pointed at null. However, these pointer abilities are also inherently dangerous: A null pointer runs the risk of being dereferenced, and the ability to change what a pointer is pointing at can make creating dangling pointers easier.

