
# Return by reference

In cases where we’re passing a class type back to the caller, we may (or may not) want to return by reference instead. **Return by reference** returns a reference that is bound to the object being returned, which avoids making a copy of the return value. To return by reference, we simply define the return value of the function to be a reference type:

```cpp
std::string&       returnByReference(); // returns a reference to an existing std::string (cheap)
const std::string& returnByReferenceToConst(); // returns a const reference to an existing std::string (cheap)
```

Here is an academic program to demonstrate the mechanics of return by reference:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

const std::string& getProgramName() // returns a const reference
{
    static const std::string s_programName { "Calculator" }; // has static duration, destroyed at end of program

    return s_programName;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << "This program is named " << getProgramName();

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
This program is named Calculator
```

# The object being returned by reference must exist after the function returns

Using return by reference has one major caveat: the programmer _must_ be sure that the object being referenced outlives the function returning the reference. Otherwise, the reference being returned will be left dangling (referencing an object that has been destroyed), and use of that reference will result in undefined behavior.

Now let’s modify the above program to show what happens in the case where our function returns a dangling reference:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

const std::string& getProgramName()
{
    const std::string programName { "Calculator" }; // now a non-static local variable, destroyed when function ends

    return programName;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << "This program is named " << getProgramName(); // undefined behavior

    return 0;
}
```

# Lifetime extension doesn’t work across function boundaries

```cpp
#include <iostream>

const int& returnByConstReference(const int& ref)
{
    return ref;
}

int main()
{
    // case 1: direct binding
    const int& ref1 { 5 }; // extends lifetime
    std::cout << ref1 << '\n'; // okay

    // case 2: indirect binding
    const int& ref2 { returnByConstReference(5) }; // binds to dangling reference
    std::cout << ref2 << '\n'; // undefined behavior

    return 0;
}
```

In case 2, a temporary object is created to hold value `5`, which function parameter `ref` binds to. The function just returns this reference back to the caller, which then uses the reference to initialize `ref2`. Because this is not a direct binding to the temporary object (as the refrence was bounced through a function), lifetime extension doesn’t apply. This leaves `ref2` dangling, and its subsequent use is undefined behavior.

# Don’t return non-const static local variables by reference

However, returning non-const static local variables by reference is fairly non-idiomatic, and should generally be avoided. Here’s a simplified example that illustrates one such problem that can occur:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

const int& getNextId()
{
    static int s_x{ 0 }; // note: variable is non-const
    ++s_x; // generate the next id
    return s_x; // and return a reference to it
}

int main()
{
    const int& id1 { getNextId() }; // id1 is a reference
    const int& id2 { getNextId() }; // id2 is a reference

    std::cout << id1 << id2 << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
22
```

This happens because `id1` and `id2` are referencing the same object (the static variable `s_x`), so when anything (e.g. `getNextId()`) modifies that value, all references are now accessing the modified value.

# Assigning/initializing a normal variable with a returned reference makes a copy

Assigning/initializing a normal variable with a returned reference makes a copy

If a function returns a reference, and that reference is used to initialize or assign to a non-reference variable, the return value will be copied (as if it had been returned by value).

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

const int& getNextId()
{
    static int s_x{ 0 };
    ++s_x;
    return s_x;
}

int main()
{
    const int id1 { getNextId() }; // id1 is a normal variable now and receives a copy of the value returned by reference from getNextId()
    const int id2 { getNextId() }; // id2 is a normal variable now and receives a copy of the value returned by reference from getNextId()

    std::cout << id1 << id2 << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

In the above example, `getNextId()` is returning a reference, but `id1` and `id2` are non-reference variables. In such a case, the value of the returned reference is copied into the normal variable. Thus, this program prints:

```Output
12
```

Of course, this also defeats the purpose of returning a value by reference.

Also note that if a program returns a dangling reference, the reference is left dangling before the copy is made, which will lead to undefined behavior.

# It’s okay to return reference parameters by reference

If a parameter is passed into a function by reference, it’s safe to return that parameter by reference. This makes sense: in order to pass an argument to a function, the argument must exist in the scope of the caller. When the called function returns, that object must still exist in the scope of the caller.

Here is a simple example of such a function:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

// Takes two std::string objects, returns the one that comes first alphabetically
const std::string& firstAlphabetical(const std::string& a, const std::string& b)
{
	return (a < b) ? a : b; // We can use operator< on std::string to determine which comes first alphabetically
}

int main()
{
	std::string hello { "Hello" };
	std::string world { "World" };

	std::cout << firstAlphabetical(hello, world) << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

```Output
Hello
```

In the above function, the caller passes in two std::string objects by const reference, and whichever of these strings comes first alphabetically is passed back by const reference. If we had used pass by value and return by value, we would have made up to 3 copies of std::string (one for each parameter, one for the return value). By using pass by reference/return by reference, we can avoid those copies.

# It’s okay to return by const reference an rvalue passed by const reference
#Doubt
It’s okay to return by const reference an rvalue passed by const reference

When an argument for a const reference parameter is an rvalue, it’s still okay to return that parameter by const reference.

This is because rvalues are not destroyed until the end of the full expression in which they are created.

First, let’s look at this example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

std::string getHello()
{
    return std::string{"Hello"};
}

int main()
{
    const std::string s{ getHello() };

    std::cout << s;

    return 0;
}
```

In this case, `getHello()` returns a `std::string` by value, which is an rvalue. This rvalue is then used to initialize `s`. After the initialization of `s`, the expression in which the rvalue was created has finished evaluating, and the rvalue is destroyed.

Now let’s take a look at this similar example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

const std::string& foo(const std::string& s)
{
    return s;
}

std::string getHello()
{
    return std::string{"Hello"};
}

int main()
{
    const std::string s{ foo(getHello()) };

    std::cout << s;

    return 0;
}
```

The only difference in this case is that the rvalue is passed by const reference to `foo()` and then returned by const reference back to the caller before it is used to initialize `s`. Everything else works identically.

# The caller can modify values through the reference

When a non-const reference is returned from a function, the caller can use the reference to modify the value being returned.

Here’s an illustrative example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

// takes two integers by non-const reference, and returns the greater by reference
int& max(int& x, int& y)
{
    return (x > y) ? x : y;
}

int main()
{
    int a{ 5 };
    int b{ 6 };

    max(a, b) = 7; // sets the greater of a or b to 7

    std::cout << a << b << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

# Return by address

**Return by address** works almost identically to return by reference, except a pointer to an object is returned instead of a reference to an object. Return by address has the same primary caveat as return by reference -- the object being returned by address must outlive the scope of the function returning the address, otherwise the caller will receive a dangling pointer.

The major advantage of return by address over return by reference is that we can have the function return `nullptr` if there is no valid object to return. For example, let’s say we have a list of students that we want to search. If we find the student we are looking for in the list, we can return a pointer to the object representing the matching student. If we don’t find any students matching, we can return `nullptr` to indicate a matching student object was not found.

The major disadvantage of return by address is that the caller has to remember to do a `nullptr` check before dereferencing the return value, otherwise a null pointer dereference may occur and undefined behavior will result. Because of this danger, return by reference should be preferred over return by address unless the ability to return “no object” is needed.