# In parameters

In most cases, a function parameter is used only to receive an input from the caller. Parameters that are used only for receiving input from the caller are sometimes called **in parameters**.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void print(int x) // x is an in parameter
{
    std::cout << x << '\n';
}

void print(const std::string& s) // s is an in parameter
{
    std::cout << s << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    print(5);
    std::string s { "Hello, world!" };
    print(s);

    return 0;
}
```

In-parameters are typically passed by value or by const reference.

# Out parameters 

A function parameter that is used only for the purpose of returning information back to the caller is called an **out parameter**.

## Out parameters have an unnatural syntax

Out-parameters, while functional, have a few downsides.

First, the caller must instantiate (and initialize) objects and pass them as arguments, even if it doesn’t intend to use them. These objects must be able to be assigned to, which means they can’t be made const.

Second, because the caller must pass in objects, these values can’t be used as temporaries, or easily used in a single expression.

The following example shows both of these downsides:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int getByValue()
{
    return 5;
}

void getByReference(int& x)
{
    x = 5;
}

int main()
{
    // return by value
    [[maybe_unused]] int x{ getByValue() }; // can use to initialize object
    std::cout << getByValue() << '\n';      // can use temporary return value in expression

    // return by out parameter
    int y{};                // must first allocate an assignable object
    getByReference(y);      // then pass to function to assign the desired value
    std::cout << y << '\n'; // and only then can we use that value

    return 0;
}
```

## Out-parameters by reference don’t make it obvious the arguments will be modified

Consider the following example:

```cpp
void foo1(int x);  // pass by value
void foo2(int& x); // pass by reference
void foo3(int* x); // pass by address

int main()
{
    int i{};

    foo1(i);  // can't modify i
    foo2(i);  // can modify i
    foo3(&i); // can modify i

    int *ptr { &i };
    foo3(ptr); // can modify i

    return 0;
}
```

The caller may also think they can pass in `nullptr` or a null pointer as a valid argument when this is disallowed. And the function is now required to do null pointer checking and handling, which adds more complexity. This need for added null pointer handling often causes more issues than just sticking with pass by reference.

# In/out parameters

In rare cases, a function will actually use the value of an out-parameter before overwriting its value. Such a parameter is called an **in-out parameter**. In-out-parameters work identically to out-parameters and have all the same challenges.

# When to pass by non-const reference

If you’re going to pass by reference in order to avoid making a copy of the argument, you should almost always pass by const reference.

However, there are two primary cases where pass by non-const reference may be the better choice.

First, use pass by non-const reference when a parameter is an in-out-parameter. Since we’re already passing in the object we need back out, it’s often more straightforward and performant to just modify that object.

```cpp
void someFcn(Foo& inout)
{
    // modify inout
}

int main()
{
    Foo foo{};
    someFcn(foo); // foo modified after this call, may not be obvious

    return 0;
}
```

The alternative is to pass the object by value or const reference instead (as per usual) and return a new object by value, which the caller can then assign back to the original object:

This has the benefit of using a more conventional return syntax, but requires making 2 extra copies (sometimes the compiler can optimize one of these copies away).

Second, use pass by non-const reference when a function would otherwise return an object by value to the caller, but making a copy of that object is _extremely_ expensive. Especially if the function is called many times in a performance-critical section of code.

```cpp
void generateExpensiveFoo(Foo& out)
{
    // modify out
}

int main()
{
    Foo foo{};
    generateExpensiveFoo(foo); // foo modified after this call

    return 0;
}
```