Variables in Java are classified into primitive and reference variables. From the programmer's perspective, a primitive variable's information is stored as the value of that variable, whereas a reference variable holds a reference to information related to that variable. reference variables are practically always objects in Java. Let's take a look at both of these types with the help of two examples.

```java
int value = 10;
System.out.println(value);
```

```Output
10
```

```java
public class Name {
    private String name;

    public Name(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }
}
```

```java
Name luke = new Name("Luke");
System.out.println(luke);
```

```Output
Name@4aa298b7
```

The previous example applies whenever the programmer has not altered an object's default print format. You can modify the default print by defining the `toString` method within the class of the given object, where you specify what the objects print should look like.

# Primitive Variables

Java has eight different primitive variables. 

These are: 
- `boolean` (a truth value: either `true` or `false`),
- `byte` (a byte containing 8 bits, between the values `-128` and `127`), 
- `char` (a 16-bit value representing a single character), `short` (a 16-bit value that represents a small integer, between the values `-32768` and `32767`), 
- `int` (a 32-bit value that represents a medium-sized integer, between the values `-231` and `231-1`), 
- `long` (a 64-bit value that represents a large integer, between values `-263` and `263-1`), 
- `float` (a floating-point number that uses 32 bits), and 
- `double` (a floating-point number that uses 64 bits).

# Reference Variables

All of the variables provided by Java (other than the eight primitive variables mentioned above) are reference type. A programmer is also free to create their own variable types by defining new classes. In practice, any object instanced from a class is a reference variable.

The most significant difference between primitive and reference variables is that primitives (usually numbers) are immutable. The internal state of reference variables, on the other hand, can typically be mutated. This has to do with the fact that the value of a primitive variable is stored directly in the variable, whereas the value of a reference variable is a reference to the variable's data, i.e., its internal state.

Arithmetic operations, such as addition, subtraction, and multiplication can be used with primitive variables — these operations do not change the original values of the variables. Arithmetic operations create new values that can be stored in variables as needed. Conversely, the values of reference variables cannot be changed by these arithmetic expressions.