# Object of same type as method parameter

```java
public boolean before(SimpleDate compared) {
        // first compare years
        if (this.year < compared.year) {
            return true;
        }

        if (this.year > compared.year) {
            return false;
        }

        // years are same, compare months
        if (this.month < compared.month) {
            return true;
        }

        if (this.month > compared.month) {
            return false;
        }

        // years and months are same, compare days
        if (this.day < compared.day) {
            return true;
        }

        return false;
    }
```

Even though the object variables `year`, `month`, and `day` are encapsulated (`private`) object variables, we can read their values by writing `compared.*variableName*`. This is because a `private` variable can be accessed from all the methods contained by that class.
# Comparing the equality of objects (equals)

If we want to be able to compare two objects of our own design with the `equals` method, that method must be defined in the class. The method `equals` is defined as a method that returns a boolean type value — the return value indicates whether the objects are equal.

The `equals` method is implemented in such a way that it can be used to compare the current object with any other object. The method receives an `Object`-type object as its single parameter — all objects are `Object`-type, in addition to their own type. The `equals` method first compares if the addresses are equal: if so, the objects are equal. After this, we examine if the types of the objects are the same: if not, the objects are not equal. Next, the `Object`-type object passed as the parameter is converted to the type of the object that is being examined by using a type cast, so that the values of the object variables can be compared.

```java
@Override
public boolean equals(Object compared) {
        // if the variables are located in the same position, they are equal
        if (this == compared) {
            return true;
        }

        // if the type of the compared object is not SimpleDate, the objects are not equal
        if (!(compared instanceof SimpleDate)) {
            return false;
        }
```
# Object equality and lists

The `contains` method of a list uses the `equals` method that is defined for the objects in its search for objects. In the example above, the `Bird` class has no definition for that method, so a bird with exactly the same contents — but a different reference — cannot be found on the list. 