**Software testing** (also called **software validation**) is the process of determining whether or not the software actually works as expected.

# Test your programs in small pieces

You’re much better off writing small functions (or classes), and then compiling and testing them immediately. That way, if you make a mistake, you’ll know it has to be in the small amount of code that you changed since the last time you compiled/tested. That means fewer places to look, and far less time spent debugging.

Testing a small part of your code in isolation to ensure that “unit” of code is correct is called **unit testing**. Each **unit test** is designed to ensure that a particular behavior of the unit is correct.

If the program is short and accepts user input, trying a variety of user inputs might be sufficient. But as programs get longer and longer, this becomes less sufficient, and there is more value in testing individual functions or classes before integrating them into the rest of the program.

# Informal testing

One way you can test code is to do informal testing as you write the program. After writing a unit of code (a function, a class, or some other discrete “package” of code), you can write some code to test the unit that was just added, and then erase the test once the test passes.

## Preserving your tests

Although writing temporary tests is a quick and easy way to test some code, it doesn’t account for the fact that at some point, you may want to test that same code again later. Perhaps you modified a function to add a new capability, and want to make sure you didn’t break anything that was already working. For that reason, it can make more sense to preserve your tests so they can be run again in the future.

## Automating your test functions

One problem with the above test function is that it relies on you to manually verify the results when you run it. This requires you to remember what the expected answer was at worst (assuming you didn’t document it), and manually compare the actual results to the expected results.

We can do better by writing a test function that contains both the tests AND the expected answers and compares them so we don’t have to.

# Unit testing frameworks

Because writing functions to exercise other functions is so common and useful, there are entire frameworks (called **unit testing frameworks**) that are designed to help simplify the process of writing, maintaining, and executing unit tests. Since these involve third party software, we won’t cover them here, but you should be aware they exist.

# Integration testing

Once each of your units has been tested in isolation, they can be integrated into your program and retested to make sure they were integrated properly. This is called an **integration test**. Integration testing tends to be more complicated -- for now, running your program a few times and spot checking the behavior of the integrated unit will suffice.
