The term **code coverage** is used to describe how much of the source code of a program is executed while testing. There are many different metrics used for code coverage.

# Statement coverage

The term **statement coverage** refers to the percentage of statements in your code that have been exercised by your testing routines.

# Branch coverage

**Branch coverage** refers to the percentage of branches that have been executed, each possible branch counted separately. An `if statement` has two branches -- a branch that executes when the condition is `true`, and a branch that executes when the condition is `false` (even if there is no corresponding `else statement` to execute). A switch statement can have many branches.

# Loop coverage

**Loop coverage** (informally called **the 0, 1, 2 test**) says that if you have a loop in your code, you should ensure it works properly when it iterates 0 times, 1 time, and 2 times. If it works correctly for the 2-iteration case, it should work correctly for all iterations greater than 2. These three tests therefore cover all possibilities.

# Testing different categories of input

When writing functions that accept parameters, or when accepting user input, consider what happens with different categories of input. In this context, we’re using the term “category” to mean a set of inputs that have similar characteristics.

For example, if I wrote a function to produce the square root of an integer, what values would it make sense to test it with? You’d probably start with some normal value, like `4`. But it would also be a good idea to test with `0`, and a negative number.

Here are some basic guidelines for category testing:

- For integers, make sure you’ve considered how your function handles negative values, zero, and positive values. You should also check for overflow if that’s relevant.

- For floating point numbers, make sure you’ve considered how your function handles values that have precision issues (values that are slightly larger or smaller than expected). Good `double` type values to test with are `0.1` and `-0.1` (to test numbers that are slightly larger than expected) and `0.6` and `-0.6` (to test numbers that are slightly smaller than expected).

- For strings, make sure you’ve considered how your function handles an empty string, an alphanumeric string, strings that have whitespace (leading, trailing, and inner), and strings that are all whitespace.

If your function takes a pointer, don’t forget to test `nullptr` as well.