
# Introduction to constants

A **constant** is a value that may not be changed during the program’s execution.

C++ supports two different kinds of constants:

- **Named constants** are constant values that are associated with an identifier. These are also sometimes called **symbolic constants**, or occasionally just **constants**.
- **Literal constants** are constant values that are not associated with an identifier.

# Types of named constants

There are three ways to define a named constant in C++:

- [[#Constant variables]]
- [[7. Introduction to preprocessor#Object-like macros with substitution text|Object-like macros with substitution text]]
- Enumerated constants

## Constant variables

### Declaring a const variable

To declare a constant variable, we place the `const` keyword (called a “const qualifier”) adjacent to the object’s type:

```cpp
const double gravity { 9.8 };  // preferred use of const before type
int const sidesInSquare { 4 }; // "east const" style, okay but not preferred
```

### Const variables must be initialized

Const variables _must_ be initialized when you define them, and then that value can not be changed via assignment:

```cpp
int main()
{
    const double gravity; // error: const variables must be initialized
    gravity = 9.9;        // error: const variables can not be changed

    return 0;
}
```

### Const function parameters

Function parameters can be made constants via the `const` keyword:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printInt(const int x)
{
    std::cout << x << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    printInt(5); // 5 will be used as the initializer for x
    printInt(6); // 6 will be used as the initializer for x

    return 0;
}
```

The value of the argument in the function call will be used as the initializer for `x`.
Making a function parameter constant enlists the compiler’s help to ensure that the parameter’s value is not changed inside the function.

### Const return values

A function’s return value may also be made const:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

const int getValue()
{
    return 5;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << getValue() << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

For fundamental types, the `const` qualifier on a return type is simply ignored (your compiler may generate a warning).

For other types (which we’ll cover later), there is typically little point in returning const objects by value, because they are temporary copies that will be destroyed anyway. Returning a const value can also impede certain kinds of compiler optimizations (involving move semantics), which can result in lower performance.

## Prefer constant variables to preprocessor macros

1. The biggest issue is that macros don’t follow normal C++ scoping rules. Once a macro is \#defined, all subsequent occurrences of the macro’s name in the current file will be replaced. If that name is used elsewhere, you’ll get macro substitution where you didn’t want it. This will most likely lead to strange compilation errors.
2. Second, it is often harder to debug code using macros. Although your source code will have the macro’s name, the compiler and debugger never see the macro because it has already been replaced before they run. Many debuggers are unable to inspect a macro’s value, and often have limited capabilities when working with macros.
3. Third, macro substitution behaves differently than everything else in C++. Inadvertent mistakes can be easily made as a result. 

# Literals

**Literals** are values that are inserted directly into the code. For example:

```cpp
return 5;                     // 5 is an integer literal
bool myNameIsAlex { true };   // true is a boolean literal
double d { 3.4 };             // 3.4 is a double literal
std::cout << "Hello, world!"; // "Hello, world!" is a C-style string literal
```

Literals are sometimes called **literal constants** because their meaning cannot be redefined

## The type of a literal

Just like objects have a type, all literals have a type. The type of a literal is deduced from the literal’s value. For example, a literal that is a whole number (e.g. `5`) is deduced to be of type `int`.

By default:

|Literal value|Examples|Default literal type|Note|
|---|---|---|---|
|integer value|5, 0, -3|int||
|boolean value|true, false|bool||
|floating point value|1.2, 0.0, 3.4|double (not float!)||
|character|‘a’, ‘\n’|char||
|C-style string|“Hello, world!”|const char[14]|see C-style string literals section below|

## Literal suffixes

If the default type of a literal is not as desired, you can change the type of a literal by adding a suffix:

|Data type|Suffix|Meaning|
|---|---|---|
|integral|u or U|unsigned int|
|integral|l or L|long|
|integral|ul, uL, Ul, UL, lu, lU, Lu, LU|unsigned long|
|integral|ll or LL|long long|
|integral|ull, uLL, Ull, ULL, llu, llU, LLu, LLU|unsigned long long|
|integral|z or Z|The signed version of std::size_t (C++23)|
|integral|uz, uZ, Uz, UZ, zu, zU, Zu, ZU|std::size_t (C++23)|
|floating point|f or F|float|
|floating point|l or L|long double|
|string|s|std::string|
|string|sv|std::string_view|

Most of the suffixes are not case sensitive. The exceptions are:

- `s` and `sv` must be lower case.
- Two consecutive `l` or `L` characters must have the same casing.

### Floating point literals

New programmers are often confused about why the following causes a compiler warning:

```cpp
float f { 4.1 }; // warning: 4.1 is a double literal, not a float literal
```

Because `4.1` has no suffix, the literal has type `double`, not `float`. When the compiler determines the type of a literal, it doesn’t care what you’re doing with the literal (e.g. in this case, using it to initialize a `float` variable). Since the type of the literal (`double`) doesn’t match the type of the variable it is being used to initialize (`float`), the literal value must be converted to a `float` so it can then be used to initialize variable `f`. Converting a value from a `double` to a `float` can result in a loss of precision, so the compiler will issue a warning.

### String literals

In programming, a **string** is a collection of sequential characters used to represent text (such as names, words, and sentences). 

There are two non-obvious things worth knowing about C-style string literals.

1. All C-style string literals have an implicit null terminator. Consider a string such as `"hello"`. While this C-style string appears to only have five characters, it actually has six: `'h'`, `'e'`, `'l`‘, `'l'`, `'o'`, and `'\0'` (a character with ASCII code 0). This trailing ‘\0’ character is a special character called a **null terminator**, and it is used to indicate the end of the string. A string that ends with a null terminator is called a **null-terminated string**.
2. Unlike most other literals (which are values, not objects), C-style string literals are const objects that are created at the start of the program and are guaranteed to exist for the entirety of the program. This fact will become important in a few lessons, when we discuss `std::string_view`.