| Operator    | Symbol | Form      | Meaning                                                                |
| ----------- | ------ | --------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Conditional | ?:     | c ? x : y | If conditional `c` is `true` then evaluate `x`, otherwise evaluate `y` |
|             |        |           |                                                                        |
The **conditional operator** (`?:`) (also sometimes called the **arithmetic if** operator) is a ternary operator (an operator that takes 3 operands).

#Syntax 
The `?:` operator takes the following form:
`condition ? expression1 : expression2;`

If `condition` evaluates to `true`, then `expression1` is evaluated, otherwise `expression2` is evaluated. The `:` and `expression2` are not optional.

# The conditional operator evaluates as an expression

Because the operands of the conditional operator are expressions rather than statements, the conditional operator can be used in places where an expression is required.

# The type of the expressions must match or be convertible

To comply with C++’s type checking rules, one of the following must be true:

- The type of the second and third operand must match.
- The compiler must be able to find a way to convert one or both of the second and third operands to matching types. The conversion rules the compiler uses are fairly complex and may yield surprising results in some cases.

# So when should you use the conditional operator?

The conditional operator is most useful when doing one of the following:

- Initializing an object with one of two values.
- Assigning one of two values to an object.
- Passing one of two values to a function.
- Returning one of two values from a function.
- Printing one of two values.