Writing functions provides many potential benefits, as code in a function:

- Is easier to read and understand in the context of the overall program.
- Is easier to use, as you can call the function without understanding how it is implemented.
- Is easier to update, as the code in a function can be updated in one place.
- Is easier to reuse, as functions are naturally modular.

However, one downside of using a function is that every time a function is called, there is a certain amount of performance overhead that occurs.

# Inline expansion

**Inline expansion** is a process where a function call is replaced by the code from the called function’s definition.
	**Inline expansion** is a process where a function call is replaced by the code from the called function’s definition.

[[C++/EXTRA#The performance of inline code]]

# When inline expansion occurs

Every function falls into one of two categories, where calls to the function:

- May be expanded (most functions are in this category).
- Can’t be expanded.

Most functions fall into the “may” category: their function calls can be expanded if and when it is beneficial to do so. For functions in this category, a modern compiler will assess each function and each function call to make a determination about whether that particular function call would benefit from inline expansion. A compiler might decide to expand none, some, or all of the function calls to a given function.

# The inline keyword, historically

C++ provided the keyword `inline`, which was originally intended to be used as a hint to the compiler that a function would (probably) benefit from being expanded inline.

A function that is declared using the `inline` keyword is called an **inline function**.

However, in modern C++, the `inline` keyword is no longer used to request that a function be expanded inline. There are quite a few reasons for this:

- Using `inline` to request inline expansion is a form of premature optimization, and misuse could actually harm performance.
- The `inline` keyword is just a hint -- the compiler is completely free to ignore a request to inline a function. This is likely to be the result if you try to inline a lengthy function! The compiler is also free to perform inline expansion of functions that do not use the `inline` keyword as part of its normal set of optimizations.
- The `inline` keyword is defined at the wrong level of granularity. We use the `inline` keyword on a function definition, but inline expansion is actually determined per function call. It may be beneficial to expand some function calls and detrimental to expand others, and there is no syntax to influence this.

# The inline keyword, modernly

In modern C++, the term `inline` has evolved to mean “multiple definitions are allowed”. Thus, an inline function is one that is allowed to be defined in multiple translation units (without violating the ODR).

Inline functions have two primary requirements:

- The compiler needs to be able to see the full definition of an inline function in each translation unit where the function is used (a forward declaration will not suffice on its own). The definition can occur after the point of use if a forward declaration is also provided. Only one such definition can occur per translation unit, otherwise a compilation error will occur.
- Every definition for an inline function must be identical, otherwise undefined behavior will result.

The linker will consolidate all inline function definitions for an identifier into a single definition (thus still meeting the requirements of the one definition rule).

Here’s an example:

main.cpp:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

double circumference(double radius); // forward declaration

inline double pi() { return 3.14159; }

int main()
{
    std::cout << pi() << '\n';
    std::cout << circumference(2.0) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

math.cpp

```cpp
inline double pi() { return 3.14159; }

double circumference(double radius)
{
    return 2.0 * pi() * radius;
}
```

Notice that both files have a definition for function `pi()` -- however, because this function has been marked as `inline`, this is acceptable, and the linker will de-duplicate them. If you remove the `inline` keyword from both definitions of `pi()`, you’ll get an ODR violation (as duplicate definitions for non-inline functions are disallowed).

# Why not make all functions inline and defined in a header file?

There are a few good reasons:

- It can increase your compile times. When a function in a code file changes, only that code file needs to be recompiled. When an inline function in a header file changes, every code file that includes that header (either directly or via another header) needs to recompiled. On large projects, this can have a drastic impact.
- It can lead to more naming collisions since you’ll end up with more code in a single code file.

# Inline variables

C++17 introduces **inline variables**, which are variables that are allowed to be defined in multiple files. Inline variables work similarly to inline functions, and have the same requirements (the compiler must be able to see an identical full definition everywhere the variable is used).