# Constexpr
## Constexpr functions can be evaluated at compile-time

A **constexpr function** is a function whose return value may be computed at compile-time. To make a function a constexpr function, we simply use the `constexpr` keyword in front of the return type.

To be eligible for compile-time evaluation, a function must have a constexpr return type, and a call to the function must have arguments that are known at compile time (e.g. are constant expressions).

## Constexpr functions can also be evaluated at runtime

Functions with a constexpr return value can also be evaluated at runtime, in which case they will return a non-constexpr result. For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

constexpr int greater(int x, int y)
{
    return (x > y ? x : y);
}

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 }; // not constexpr
    int y{ 6 }; // not constexpr

    std::cout << greater(x, y) << " is greater!\n"; // will be evaluated at runtime

    return 0;
}
```

In this example, because arguments `x` and `y` are not constant expressions, the function cannot be resolved at compile-time. However, the function will still be resolved at runtime, returning the expected value as a non-constexpr `int`.

## So when is a constexpr function evaluated at compile-time?

According to the C++ standard, a constexpr function that is eligible for compile-time evaluation _must_ be evaluated at compile-time if the return value is used where a constant expression is required. Otherwise, the compiler is free to evaluate the function at either compile-time or runtime.

Let’s examine a few cases to explore this further:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

constexpr int greater(int x, int y)
{
    return (x > y ? x : y);
}

int main()
{
    constexpr int g { greater(5, 6) };              // case 1: always evaluated at compile-time
    std::cout << g << " is greater!\n";

    std::cout << greater(5, 6) << " is greater!\n"; // case 2: may be evaluated at either runtime or compile-time

    int x{ 5 }; // not constexpr but value is known at compile-time
    std::cout << greater(x, 6) << " is greater!\n"; // case 3: likely evaluated at runtime

    std::cin >> x;
    std::cout << greater(x, 6) << " is greater!\n"; // case 4: always evaluated at runtime

    return 0;
}
```

Put another way, we can categorize the likelihood that a constexpr function will actually be evaluated at compile-time as follows:

Always (required by the standard):

- Constexpr function is called where constant expression is required.
- Constexpr function is called from other function being evaluated at compile-time.

Probably (there’s little reason not to):

- Constexpr function is called where constant expression isn’t required, all arguments are constant expressions.

Possibly (if optimized under the as-if rule):

- Constexpr function is called where constant expression isn’t required, some arguments are not constant expressions but their values are known at compile-time.

Never (not possible):

- Constexpr function is called where constant expression isn’t required, some arguments have values that are not known at compile-time.

[[C++/EXTRA#What about `std is_constant_evaluated` or `if constexpr`?]]

# Consteval

C++20 introduces the keyword **consteval**, which is used to indicate that a function _must_ evaluate at compile-time, otherwise a compile error will result. Such functions are called **immediate functions**.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

consteval int greater(int x, int y) // function is now consteval
{
    return (x > y ? x : y);
}

int main()
{
    constexpr int g { greater(5, 6) };              // ok: will evaluate at compile-time
    std::cout << g << '\n';

    std::cout << greater(5, 6) << " is greater!\n"; // ok: will evaluate at compile-time

    int x{ 5 }; // not constexpr
    std::cout << greater(x, 6) << " is greater!\n"; // error: consteval functions must evaluate at compile-time

    return 0;
}
```

# Using consteval to make constexpr execute at compile-time
The downside of consteval functions is that such functions can’t evaluate at runtime, making them less flexible than constexpr functions, which can do either. Therefore, it would still be useful to have a convenient way to force constexpr functions to evaluate at compile-time (even when the return value is being used where a constant expression is not required), so that we could have compile-time evaluation when possible, and runtime evaluation when we can’t.

Consteval functions provides a way to make this happen, using a neat helper function:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

// Uses abbreviated function template (C++20) and `auto` return type to make this function work with any type of value
// See 'related content' box below for more info (you don't need to know how these work to use this function)
consteval auto compileTime(auto value)
{
    return value;
}

constexpr int greater(int x, int y) // function is constexpr
{
    return (x > y ? x : y);
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << greater(5, 6) << '\n';              // may or may not execute at compile-time
    std::cout << compileTime(greater(5, 6)) << '\n'; // will execute at compile-time

    int x { 5 };
    std::cout << greater(x, 6) << '\n';              // we can still call the constexpr version at runtime if we wish

    return 0;
}
```

# Constexpr/consteval functions are implicitly inline

Because constexpr functions may be evaluated at compile-time, the compiler must be able to see the full definition of the constexpr function at all points where the function is called. A forward declaration will not suffice, even if the actual function definition appears later in the same compilation unit.

This means that a constexpr function called in multiple files needs to have its definition included into each such file -- which would normally be a violation of the one-definition rule. To avoid such problems, constexpr functions are implicitly inline, which makes them exempt from the one-definition rule.

As a result, constexpr functions are often defined in header files, so they can be \#included into any .cpp file that requires the full definition.

Consteval functions are also implicitly inline