# **Pure virtual (abstract) functions and abstract base classes**

C++ allows you to create a special kind of virtual function called a **pure virtual function** (or **abstract function**) that has no body at all! A pure virtual function simply acts as a placeholder that is meant to be redefined by derived classes.

To create a pure virtual function, rather than define a body for the function, we simply assign the function the value 0.

```cpp
#include <string_view>

class Base
{
public:
    std::string_view sayHi() const { return "Hi"; } // a normal non-virtual function

    virtual std::string_view getName() const { return "Base"; } // a normal virtual function

    virtual int getValue() const = 0; // a pure virtual function

    int doSomething() = 0; // Compile error: can not set non-virtual functions to 0
};
```

Using a pure virtual function has two main consequences: 

First, any class with one or more pure virtual functions becomes an **abstract base class**, which means that it can not be instantiated! Consider what would happen if we could create an instance of Base:

```cpp
int main()
{
    Base base {}; // We can't instantiate an abstract base class, but for the sake of example, pretend this was allowed
    base.getValue(); // what would this do?

    return 0;
}
```

Because there’s no definition for getValue(), what would base.getValue() resolve to?

Second, any derived class must define a body for this function, or that derived class will be considered an abstract base class as well.

**A pure virtual function is useful when we have a function that we want to put in the base class, but only the derived classes know what it should return. A pure virtual function makes it so the base class can not be instantiated, and the derived classes are forced to define these functions before they can be instantiated. This helps ensure the derived classes do not forget to redefine functions that the base class was expecting them to.**

# **Pure virtual functions with definitions**

It turns out that we can create pure virtual functions that have definitions:

```cpp
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

class Animal // This Animal is an abstract base class
{
protected:
    std::string m_name {};

public:
    Animal(std::string_view name)
        : m_name{ name }
    {
    }

    const std::string& getName() { return m_name; }
    virtual std::string_view speak() const = 0; // The = 0 means this function is pure virtual

    virtual ~Animal() = default;
};

std::string_view Animal::speak() const  // even though it has a definition
{
    return "buzz";
}
```

In this case, speak() is still considered a pure virtual function because of the “= 0” (even though it has been given a definition) and Animal is still considered an abstract base class (and thus can’t be instantiated). Any class that inherits from Animal needs to provide its own definition for speak() or it will also be considered an abstract base class.

When providing a definition for a pure virtual function, the definition must be provided separately (not inline).

This paradigm can be useful when you want your base class to provide a default implementation for a function, but still force any derived classes to provide their own implementation. However, if the derived class is happy with the default implementation provided by the base class, it can simply call the base class implementation directly.

# **Interface classes**

An **interface class** is a class that has no member variables, and where _all_ of the functions are pure virtual! Interfaces are useful when you want to define the functionality that derived classes must implement, but leave the details of how the derived class implements that functionality entirely up to the derived class.

Interface classes are often named beginning with an I. Here’s a sample interface class:

```cpp
#include <string_view>

class IErrorLog
{
public:
    virtual bool openLog(std::string_view filename) = 0;
    virtual bool closeLog() = 0;

    virtual bool writeError(std::string_view errorMessage) = 0;

    virtual ~IErrorLog() {} // make a virtual destructor in case we delete an IErrorLog pointer, so the proper derived destructor is called
};
```

Any class inheriting from IErrorLog must provide implementations for all three functions in order to be instantiated.

Now, let’s say you need to write some code that uses an error log. If you write your code so it includes FileErrorLog or ScreenErrorLog directly, then you’re effectively stuck using that kind of error log (at least without recoding your program). For example, the following function effectively forces callers of mySqrt() to use a FileErrorLog, which may or may not be what they want.

```cpp
#include <cmath> // for sqrt()

double mySqrt(double value, FileErrorLog& log)
{
    if (value < 0.0)
    {
        log.writeError("Tried to take square root of value less than 0");
        return 0.0;
    }

    return std::sqrt(value);
}
```

A much better way to implement this function is to use IErrorLog instead:

```cpp
#include <cmath> // for sqrt()
double mySqrt(double value, IErrorLog& log)
{
    if (value < 0.0)
    {
        log.writeError("Tried to take square root of value less than 0");
        return 0.0;
    }

    return std::sqrt(value);
}
```

Now the caller can pass in _any_ class that conforms to the IErrorLog interface. If they want the error to go to a file, they can pass in an instance of FileErrorLog. If they want it to go to the screen, they can pass in an instance of ScreenErrorLog. Or if they want to do something you haven’t even thought of, such as sending an email to someone when there’s an error, they can derive a new class from IErrorLog (e.g. EmailErrorLog) and use an instance of that! By using IErrorLog, your function becomes more independent and flexible.

Don’t forget to include a virtual destructor for your interface classes, so that the proper derived destructor will be called if a pointer to the interface is deleted.

# **Pure virtual functions and the virtual table**

For consistency, abstract classes still have virtual tables. A constructor or destructor of an abstract class can call a virtual function, and it needs to resolve to the proper function (in the same class, since the derived classes either haven’t been constructed yet or have already been destroyed).

The virtual table entry for a class with a pure virtual function will generally either contain a null pointer, or point to a generic function that prints an error (sometimes this function is named __purecall).