A **conditional statement** is a statement that specifies whether some associated statement(s) should be executed or not.

C++ supports two basic kinds of conditionals: `if statements` and `switch statements`

# Quick if-statement recap

#Syntax 
The most basic kind of conditional statement in C++ is the `if statement`. An `if statement` takes the form:

```cpp
if (condition)
    true_statement;
```

or with an optional `else statement`:

```cpp
if (condition)
    true_statement;
else
    false_statement;
```

# If or else with multiple conditional statements

`true_statement` and `false_statement` can only be a single statement.

However, it’s common to want to execute multiple statements based on some condition. To do so, we can use a compound statement (block).

# Nested if statements and the dangling else problem

It is possible to nest `if statements` within other `if statements`.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter a number: ";
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

    if (x >= 0) // outer if statement
        // it is bad coding style to nest if statements this way
        if (x <= 20) // inner if statement
            std::cout << x << " is between 0 and 20\n";

    // which if statement does this else belong to?
    else
        std::cout << x << " is negative\n";

    return 0;
}
```

The above program introduces a source of potential ambiguity called a **dangling else** problem. Is the `else statement` in the above program matched up with the outer or inner `if statement`?

The answer is that an `else statement` is paired up with the last unmatched `if statement` in the same block. Thus, in the program above, the `else` is matched up with the inner `if statement`.

# Null statements

A **null statement** is an expression statement that consists of just a semicolon:

```cpp
if (x > 10)
    ; // this is a null statement
```

`Null statements` do nothing. They are typically used when the language requires a statement to exist but the programmer doesn’t need one. For readability, `null statements` are typically placed on their own lines.

# Operator== vs Operator= inside the conditional

Inside your conditional, you should be using `operator==` when testing for equality, not `operator=`.

Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter 0 or 1: ";
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;
    if (x = 0) // oops, we used an assignment here instead of a test for equality
        std::cout << "You entered 0\n";
    else
        std::cout << "You entered 1\n";

    return 0;
}
```

This program will compile and run, but will produce the wrong result in some cases:

Enter 0 or 1: 0
You entered 1

In fact, this program will always produce the result `You entered 1`. This happens because `x = 0` first assigns the value `0` to `x`, then evaluates to the value of `x`, which is now `0`, which is Boolean `false`. Since the conditional is always `false`, the `else statement` always executes.

# Constexpr if statements
C++17 introduces the **constexpr if statement**, which requires the conditional to be a constant expression. The conditional of a constexpr-if-statement will be evaluated at compile-time.

If the constexpr conditional evaluates to `true`, the entire if-else will be replaced by the true-statement. If the constexpr conditional evaluates to `false`, the entire if-else will be replaced by the false-statement (if it exists) or nothing (if there is no else).

To use a constexpr-if-statement, we add the `constexpr` keyword after the `if`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	constexpr double gravity{ 9.8 };

	if constexpr (gravity == 9.8) // now using constexpr if
		std::cout << "Gravity is normal.\n";
	else
		std::cout << "We are not on Earth.\n";

	return 0;
}
```

When the above code is compiled, the compiler will evaluate the conditional at compile time, see that it is always `true`, and keep only the single statement `std::cout << "Gravity is normal.\n";`.