Because testing a variable or expression for equality against a set of different values is common, C++ provides an alternative conditional statement called a **switch statement** that is specialized for this purpose. 
```cpp
#include <iostream>

void printDigitName(int x)
{
    switch (x)
    {
    case 1:
        std::cout << "One";
        return;
    case 2:
        std::cout << "Two";
        return;
    case 3:
        std::cout << "Three";
        return;
    default:
        std::cout << "Unknown";
        return;
    }
}

int main()
{
    printDigitName(2);
    std::cout << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```
The idea behind a **switch statement** is simple: an expression (sometimes called the `condition`) is evaluated to produce a value. If the expression’s value is equal to the value after any of the `case labels`, the statements after the matching `case label` are executed. If no matching value can be found and a `default label` exists, the statements after the `default label` are executed instead.\

# Starting a switch

We start a `switch statement` by using the `switch` keyword, followed by parentheses with the conditional expression that we would like to evaluate inside. Often the expression is just a single variable, but it can be any valid expression.

The one restriction is that the condition must evaluate to an integral type or be convertible to one.

Expressions that evaluate to floating point types, strings, and most other non-integral types may not be used here.

# Case labels

The first kind of label is the **case label**, which is declared using the `case` keyword and followed by a constant expression. The constant expression must either match the type of the condition or must be convertible to that type.

If the value of the conditional expression equals the expression after a `case label`, execution begins at the first statement after that `case label` and then continues sequentially.

There is no practical limit to the number of case labels you can have, but all case labels in a switch must be unique. That is, you can not do this:

```cpp
switch (x)
{
case 54:
case 54:  // error: already used value 54!
case '6': // error: '6' converts to integer value 54, which is already used
}
```

# The default label

The second kind of label is the **default label** (often called the **default case**), which is declared using the `default` keyword. If the conditional expression does not match any case label and a default label exists, execution begins at the first statement after the default label.

The default label is optional, and there can only be one default label per switch statement. By convention, the `default case` is placed last in the switch block.

# No matching case label and no default case

If the value of the conditional expression does not match any of the case labels, and no default case has been provided, then no cases inside the switch are executed. Execution continues after the end of the switch block.

# Taking a break

A **break statement** (declared using the `break` keyword) tells the compiler that we are done executing statements within the switch, and that execution should continue with the statement after the end of the switch block. This allows us to exit a `switch statement` without exiting the entire function.

# Switch fallthrough

## Fallthrough

When a switch expression matches a case label or optional default label, execution begins at the first statement following the matching label. Execution will then continue sequentially until one of the following termination conditions happens:

- The end of the switch block is reached.
- Another control flow statement (typically a `break` or `return`) causes the switch block or function to exit.
- Something else interrupts the normal flow of the program (e.g. the OS shuts the program down, the universe implodes, etc…)

Here is a program that exhibits this behavior:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    switch (2)
    {
    case 1: // Does not match
        std::cout << 1 << '\n'; // Skipped
    case 2: // Match!
        std::cout << 2 << '\n'; // Execution begins here
    case 3:
        std::cout << 3 << '\n'; // This is also executed
    case 4:
        std::cout << 4 << '\n'; // This is also executed
    default:
        std::cout << 5 << '\n'; // This is also executed
    }

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
2
3
4
5
```
This is probably not what we wanted! When execution flows from a statement underneath a label into statements underneath a subsequent label, this is called **fallthrough**.

## The \[\[fallthrough]] attribute

Commenting intentional fallthrough is a common convention to tell other developers that fallthrough is intended. While this works for other developers, the compiler and code analysis tools don’t know how to interpret comments, so it won’t get rid of the warnings.

To help address this, C++17 adds a new attribute called `[[fallthrough]]`.

**Attributes** are a modern C++ feature that allows the programmer to provide the compiler with some additional data about the code. To specify an attribute, the attribute name is placed between double brackets. Attributes are not statements -- rather, they can be used almost anywhere where they are contextually relevant.

The `[[fallthrough]]` attribute modifies a `null statement` to indicate that fallthrough is intentional (and no warnings should be triggered):

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    switch (2)
    {
    case 1:
        std::cout << 1 << '\n';
        break;
    case 2:
        std::cout << 2 << '\n'; // Execution begins here
        [[fallthrough]]; // intentional fallthrough -- note the semicolon to indicate the null statement
    case 3:
        std::cout << 3 << '\n'; // This is also executed
        break;
    }

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
2
3
```

And it should not generate any warnings about the fallthrough.

# Sequential case labels

You can use the logical OR operator to combine multiple tests into a single statement:

```cpp
bool isVowel(char c)
{
    return (c=='a' || c=='e' || c=='i' || c=='o' || c=='u' ||
        c=='A' || c=='E' || c=='I' || c=='O' || c=='U');
}
```

This suffers from the same challenges that we presented in the introduction to switch statements: `c` gets evaluated multiple times and the reader has to make sure it is `c` that is being evaluated each time.

You can do something similar using switch statements by placing multiple case labels in sequence:

```cpp
bool isVowel(char c)
{
    switch (c)
    {
    case 'a': // if c is 'a'
    case 'e': // or if c is 'e'
    case 'i': // or if c is 'i'
    case 'o': // or if c is 'o'
    case 'u': // or if c is 'u'
    case 'A': // or if c is 'A'
    case 'E': // or if c is 'E'
    case 'I': // or if c is 'I'
    case 'O': // or if c is 'O'
    case 'U': // or if c is 'U'
        return true;
    default:
        return false;
    }
}
```

Remember, execution begins at the first statement after a matching case label. Case labels aren’t statements (they’re labels), so they don’t count.

The first statement after _all_ of the case statements in the above program is `return true`, so if any case labels match, the function will return `true`.

Thus, we can “stack” case labels to make all of those case labels share the same set of statements afterward. This is not considered fallthrough behavior, so use of comments or `[[fallthrough]]` is not needed here.

# Labels do not define a new scope

With switch statements, the statements after labels are all scoped to the switch block. No implicit blocks are created.

```cpp
switch (1)
{
case 1: // does not create an implicit block
    foo(); // this is part of the switch scope, not an implicit block to case 1
    break; // this is part of the switch scope, not an implicit block to case 1
default:
    std::cout << "default case\n";
    break;
}
```

# Variable declaration and initialization inside case statements

You can declare or define (but not initialize) variables inside the switch, both before and after the case labels:

```cpp
switch (1)
{
    int a; // okay: definition is allowed before the case labels
    int b{ 5 }; // illegal: initialization is not allowed before the case labels

case 1:
    int y; // okay but bad practice: definition is allowed within a case
    y = 4; // okay: assignment is allowed
    break;

case 2:
    int z{ 4 }; // illegal: initialization is not allowed if subsequent cases exist
    y = 5; // okay: y was declared above, so we can use it here too
    break;

case 3:
    break;
}
```

Although variable `y` was defined in `case 1`, it was used in `case 2` as well. All statements inside the switch are considered to be part of the same scope. Thus, a variable declared or defined in one case can be used in a later case, even if the case in which the variable is defined is never executed (because the switch jumped over it)!

However, initialization of variables _does_ require the definition to execute at runtime (since the value of the initializer must be determined at that point). Initialization of variables is disallowed in any case that is not the last case (because the initializer could be jumped over, which would leave the variable uninitialized). Initialization is also disallowed before the first case, as those statements will never be executed, as there is no way for the switch to reach them.

If a case needs to define and/or initialize a new variable, the best practice is to do so inside an explicit block underneath the case statement:

```cpp
switch (1)
{
case 1:
{ // note addition of explicit block here
    int x{ 4 }; // okay, variables can be initialized inside a block inside a case
    std::cout << x;
    break;
}

default:
    std::cout << "default case\n";
    break;
}
```