# While statements

The **while statement** (also called a **while loop**) is the simplest of the three loop types that C++ provides, and it has a definition very similar to that of an if-statement:
#Syntax 

```cpp
while (condition)
    statement;
```

A `while statement` is declared using the **while** keyword. When a while-statement is executed, the expression _condition_ is evaluated. If the condition evaluates to `true`, the associated _statement_ executes.

 Once the statement has finished executing, control returns to the top of the while-statement and the process is repeated. This means a while-statement will keep looping as long as the condition continues to evaluate to `true`.

## While-statements that evaluate to false initially
Note that if the condition initially evaluates to `false`, the associated statement will not execute at all.

## Infinite loops
On the other hand, if the expression always evaluates to `true`, the while loop will execute forever. This is called an **infinite loop**.

### Intentional infinite loops
We can declare an intentional infinite loop like this:

```cpp
while (true)
{
  // this loop will execute forever
}
```

The only way to exit an infinite loop is through a return-statement, a break-statement, an exit-statement, a goto-statement, an exception being thrown, or the user killing the program.

# Loop variables

A **loop variable** is a variable that is used to control how many times a loop executes.

The most common type of loop variable is called a **counter**, which is a loop variable that counts how many times a loop has executed.

## Integral loop variables should be signed

Integral loop variables should almost always be signed, as unsigned integers can lead to unexpected issues.

# Doing something every N iterations

Each time a loop executes, it is called an **iteration**.

Often, we want to do something every 2nd, 3rd, or 4th iteration, such as print a newline. This can easily be done by using the remainder operator on our counter:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

// Iterate through every number between 1 and 50
int main()
{
    int count{ 1 };
    while (count <= 50)
    {
        // print the number (pad numbers under 10 with a leading 0 for formatting purposes)
        if (count < 10)
        {
            std::cout << '0';
        }

        std::cout << count << ' ';

        // if the loop variable is divisible by 10, print a newline
        if (count % 10 == 0)
        {
            std::cout << '\n';
        }

        // increment the loop counter
        ++count;
    }

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40
41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
```

# Nested loops
It is also possible to nest loops inside of other loops.

# Do while statements

To help solve problems like the above, C++ offers the do-while statement:
#Syntax

```cpp
do
    statement; // can be a single statement or a compound statement
while (condition);
```

A **do while statement** is a looping construct that works just like a while loop, except the statement always executes at least once. After the statement has been executed, the do-while loop checks the condition. If the condition evaluates to `true`, the path of execution jumps back to the top of the do-while loop and executes it again.

# For statements

The `for statement` looks pretty simple in abstract:
#Syntax 

```cpp
for (init-statement; condition; end-expression)
   statement;
```

## Evaluation of for-statements

A for-statement is evaluated in 3 parts:

First, the init-statement is executed. This only happens once when the loop is initiated. The init-statement is typically used for variable definition and initialization. These variables have “loop scope”, which really just is a form of block scope where these variables exist from the point of definition through the end of the loop statement. So the variables defined in the init-statement go out of scope when the block containing the loop ends.

Second, for each loop iteration, the condition is evaluated. If this evaluates to true, the statement is executed. If this evaluates to false, the loop terminates and execution continues with the next statement beyond the loop.

Finally, after the statement is executed, the end-expression is evaluated. Typically, this expression is used to increment or decrement the loop variables defined in the init-statement. After the end-expression has been evaluated, execution returns to the second step (and the condition is evaluated again).

## Omitted expressions

It is possible to write _for loops_ that omit any or all of the statements or expressions. For example, in the following example, we’ll omit the init-statement and end-expression, leaving only the condition:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int i{ 0 };
    for ( ; i < 10; ) // no init-statement or end-expression
    {
        std::cout << i << ' ';
        ++i;
    }

    std::cout << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
```

Although you do not see it very often, it is worth noting that the following example produces an infinite loop:

```cpp
for (;;)
    statement;
```

The above example is equivalent to:

```cpp
while (true)
    statement;
```

This might be a little unexpected, as you’d probably expect an omitted condition-expression to be treated as `false`. However, the C++ standard explicitly (and inconsistently) defines that an omitted condition-expression in a for loop should be treated as `true`.

# For-loops with multiple counters

Although `for loops` typically iterate over only one variable, sometimes `for loops` need to work with multiple variables. To assist with this, the programmer can define multiple variables in the init-statement, and can make use of the comma operator to change the value of multiple variables in the end-expression:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    for (int x{ 0 }, y{ 9 }; x < 10; ++x, --y)
        std::cout << x << ' ' << y << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```