A **halt** is a flow control statement that terminates the program. In C++, halts are implemented as functions (rather than keywords), so our halt statements will be function calls.

What happens when a program exits normally. When the `main()` function returns (either by reaching the end of the function, or via a `return statement`), a number of different things happen.

First, because we’re leaving the function, all local variables and function parameters are destroyed (as per usual).

Next, a special function called `std::exit()` is called, with the return value from `main()`. (the `status code`) passed in as an argument. So what is `std::exit()`?

# The std::exit() function

`std::exit()` is a function that causes the program to terminate normally. **Normal termination** means the program has exited in an expected way. Note that the term `normal termination` does not imply anything about whether the program was successful (that’s what the `status code` is for). For example, let’s say you were writing a program where you expected the user to type in a filename to process. If the user typed in an invalid filename, your program would probably return a non-zero `status code` to indicate the failure state, but it would still have a `normal termination`.

`std::exit()` performs a number of cleanup functions. First, objects with static storage duration are destroyed. Then some other miscellaneous file cleanup is done if any files were used. Finally, control is returned back to the OS, with the argument passed to `std::exit()` used as the `status code`.

# Calling std::exit() explicitly

Although `std::exit()` is called implicitly when function `main()` ends, `std::exit()` can also be called explicitly to halt the program before it would normally terminate. When `std::exit()` is called this way, you will need to include the `cstdlib` header.

Here is an example of using `std::exit()` explicitly:

```cpp
#include <cstdlib> // for std::exit()
#include <iostream>

void cleanup()
{
    // code here to do any kind of cleanup required
    std::cout << "cleanup!\n";
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << 1 << '\n';
    cleanup();

    std::exit(0); // terminate and return status code 0 to operating system

    // The following statements never execute
    std::cout << 2 << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
1
cleanup!
```

Although in the program above we call `std::exit()` from function `main()`, `std::exit()` can be called from any function to terminate the program at that point.

One important note about calling `std::exit()` explicitly: `std::exit()` does not clean up any local variables (either in the current function, or in functions up the call stack). Because of this, it’s generally better to avoid calling `std::exit()`.

# std::atexit

Because `std::exit()` terminates the program immediately, you may want to manually do some cleanup before terminating. In this context, cleanup means things like closing database or network connections, deallocating any memory you have allocated, writing information to a log file, etc...

In the above example, we called function `cleanup()` to handle our cleanup tasks. However, remembering to manually call a cleanup function before calling every call to exit() adds burden to the programmer.

To assist with this, C++ offers the `std::atexit()` function, which allows you to specify a function that will automatically be called on program termination via `std::exit()`.

Here’s an example:

```cpp
#include <cstdlib> // for std::exit()
#include <iostream>

void cleanup()
{
    // code here to do any kind of cleanup required
    std::cout << "cleanup!\n";
}

int main()
{
    // register cleanup() to be called automatically when std::exit() is called
    std::atexit(cleanup); // note: we use cleanup rather than cleanup() since we're not making a function call to cleanup() right now

    std::cout << 1 << '\n';

    std::exit(0); // terminate and return status code 0 to operating system

    // The following statements never execute
    std::cout << 2 << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

This program has the same output as the prior example:

```Output
1
cleanup!
```

A few notes here about `std::atexit()` and the cleanup function: First, because `std::exit()` is called implicitly when `main()` terminates, this will invoke any functions registered by `std::atexit()` if the program exits that way. Second, the function being registered must take no parameters and have no return value. Finally, you can register multiple cleanup functions using `std::atexit()` if you want, and they will be called in reverse order of registration (the last one registered will be called first).

# std::abort and std::terminate

The `std::abort()` function causes your program to terminate abnormally. **Abnormal termination** means the program had some kind of unusual runtime error and the program couldn’t continue to run. For example, trying to divide by 0 will result in an abnormal termination. `std::abort()` does not do any cleanup.

```cpp
#include <cstdlib> // for std::abort()
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << 1 << '\n';
    std::abort();

    // The following statements never execute
    std::cout << 2 << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

The `std::terminate()` function is typically used in conjunction with `exceptions`. Although `std::terminate` can be called explicitly, it is more often called implicitly when an exception isn’t handled (and in a few other exception-related cases). By default, `std::terminate()` calls `std::abort()`.