# What are user-defined / program-defined types?

 create entirely new, custom types for use in our programs! Such types are often called **user-defined types**
 
C++ has two different categories of compound types that can be used to create program-defined types:

- Enumerated types (including unscoped and scoped enumerations)
- Class types (including structs, classes, and unions).

# Defining program-defined types

Just like type aliases, program-defined types must also be defined before they can be used. The definition for a program-defined type is called a **type definition**.

Here’s an example showing the definition of custom Fraction type and an instantiation of an object using that type:

```cpp
// Define a program-defined type named Fraction so the compiler understands what a Fraction is
// (we'll explain what a struct is and how to use them later in this chapter)
// This only defines what a Fraction type looks like, it doesn't create one
struct Fraction
{
	int numerator {};
	int denominator {};
};

// Now we can make use of our Fraction type
int main()
{
	Fraction f { 3, 4 }; // this actually instantiates a Fraction object named f

	return 0;
}
```

Program-defined type definitions must end in a semicolon. Failure to include the semicolon at the end of a type definition is a common programmer error, and one that can be hard to debug because the compiler may error on the line _after_ the type definition.

# Naming program-defined types

By convention, program-defined types are named starting with a capital letter and don’t use a suffix (e.g. `Fraction`, not `fraction`, `fraction_t`, or `Fraction_t`).

# Using program-defined types throughout a multi-file program

Every code file that uses a program-defined type needs to see the full type definition before it is used. A forward declaration is not sufficient. This is required so that the compiler knows how much memory to allocate for objects of that type.

To propagate type definitions into the code files that need them, program-defined types are typically defined in header files, and then \#included into any code file that requires that type definition. These header files are typically given the same name as the program-defined type.

# Type definitions are partially exempt from the one-definition rule (ODR)

Using forward declarations in a similar manner doesn’t work for types, because the compiler typically needs to see the full definition to use a given type. We must be able to propagate the full type definition to each code file that needs it.

To allow for this, types are partially exempt from the one-definition rule: a given type is allowed to be defined in multiple code files.

There are two caveats that are worth knowing about. First, you can still only have one type definition per code file (this usually isn’t a problem since header guards will prevent this). Second, all of the type definitions for a given type must be identical, otherwise undefined behavior will result.

| Type            | Meaning                                                                                                                                                                    | Examples                             |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| Fundamental     | A type built into the core C++ language                                                                                                                                    | int, std::nullptr_t                  |
| Compound        | A type built from fundamental types                                                                                                                                        | int&, double*, std::string, Fraction |
| User-defined    | A class type or enumerated type  <br>(Includes those defined in the standard library or implementation)  <br>(In casual use, typically used to mean program-defined types) | std::string, Fraction                |
| Program-defined | A class type or enumerated type  <br>(Excludes those defined in standard library or implementation)                                                                        | Fraction                             |

