# Enumerations

An **enumeration** (also called an **enumerated type** or an **enum**) is a compound data type whose values are restricted to a set of named symbolic constants (called **enumerators**).

C++ supports two kinds of enumerations: unscoped enumerations and scoped enumerations.

# Unscoped enumerations

Unscoped enumerations are defined via the `enum` keyword.

We’ll explain how it all works below.

```cpp
// Define a new unscoped enumeration named Color
enum Color
{
    // Here are the enumerators
    // These symbolic constants define all the possible values this type can hold
    // Each enumerator is separated by a comma, not a semicolon
    red,
    green,
    blue, // trailing comma optional but recommended
}; // the enum definition must end with a semicolon

int main()
{
    // Define a few variables of enumerated type Color
    Color apple { red };   // my apple is red
    Color shirt { green }; // my shirt is green
    Color cup { blue };    // my cup is blue

    Color socks { white }; // error: white is not an enumerator of Color
    Color hat { 2 };       // error: 2 is not an enumerator of Color

    return 0;
}
```

Enumerators are implicitly constexpr.

# Naming enumerations and enumerators

By convention, the names of enumerated types start with a capital letter (as do all program-defined types).

# Enumerated types are distinct types

Each enumerated type you create is considered to be a **distinct type**, meaning the compiler can distinguish it from other types.

Because enumerated types are distinct, enumerators defined as part of one enumerated type can’t be used with objects of another enumerated type:

```cpp
enum Pet
{
    cat,
    dog,
    pig,
    whale,
};

enum Color
{
    black,
    red,
    blue,
};

int main()
{
    Pet myPet { black }; // compile error: black is not an enumerator of Pet
    Color shirt { pig }; // compile error: pig is not an enumerator of Color

    return 0;
}
```

[Putting enumerations to use](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/unscoped-enumerations/#:~:text=Putting%20enumerations%20to%20use)

# Avoiding enumerator naming collisions

There are quite a few common ways to prevent unscoped enumerator naming collisions.

One option is to prefix each enumerator with the name of the enumeration itself.

A better option is to put the enumerated type inside something that provides a separate scope region, such as a namespace.
	This means we now have to prefix our enumeration and enumerator names with the name of the scoped region.

Alternatively, if an enumeration is only used within the body of a single function, the enumeration should be defined inside the function. This limits the scope of the enumeration and its enumerators to just that function. The enumerators of such an enumeration will shadow identically named enumerators defined in the global scope.

# Comparing against enumerators

We can use the equality operators (`operator==` and `operator!=`) to test whether an enumeration has the value of a particular enumerator or not.
