
# Defining structs

Because structs are a program-defined type, we first have to tell the compiler what our struct type looks like before we can begin using it. Here is an example of a struct definition for a simplified employee:

```cpp
struct Employee
{
    int id {};
    int age {};
    double wage {};
};
```

The variables that are part of the struct are called **data members** (or **member variables**).

## Defining struct objects

In order to use the `Employee` type, we simply define a variable of type `Employee`:

```cpp
Employee joe {}; // Employee is the type, joe is the variable name
```

# Accessing members

To access a specific member variable, we use the **member selection operator** (`operator.`) in between the struct variable name and the member name. For example, to access Joe’s age member, we’d use `joe.age`.

Struct member variables work just like normal variables, so it is possible to do normal operations on them, including assignment, arithmetic, comparison, etc…

# Data members are not initialized by default

Much like normal variables, data members are not initialized by default. Consider the following struct:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct Employee
{
    int id; // note: no initializer here
    int age;
    double wage;
};

int main()
{
    Employee joe; // note: no initializer here either
    std::cout << joe.id << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

Because we have not provided any initializers, when `joe` is instantiated, `joe.id`, `joe.age`, and `joe.wage` will all be uninitialized. We will then get undefined behavior when we try to print the value of `joe.id`.

[What is an aggregate?](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/struct-aggregate-initialization/#aggregate)

# Aggregate initialization of a struct

When we define an object with a struct type, we need some way to initialize multiple members at initialization time:

```cpp
Employee joe; // how do we initialize joe.id, joe.age, and joe.wage?
```

Aggregates use a form of initialization called **aggregate initialization**, which allows us to directly initialize the members of aggregates. To do this, we provide an **initializer list** as an initializer, which is just a braced list of comma-separated values.

There are 2 primary forms of aggregate initialization:

```cpp
	 Employee frank = { 1, 32, 60000.0 }; // copy-list initialization using braced list
	Employee joe { 2, 28, 45000.0 };     // list initialization using braced list (preferred)
```

Each of these initialization forms does a **memberwise initialization**, which means each member in the struct is initialized in the order of declaration.

## Missing initializers in an initializer list

If an aggregate is initialized but the number of initialization values is fewer than the number of members, then all remaining members will be value-initialized.

```cpp
Employee joe { 2, 28 }; // joe.wage will be value-initialized to 0.0
```

This means we can use an empty initialization list to value-initialize all members of the struct:

```cpp
Employee joe {}; // value-initialize all members
```

## Const structs

Variables of a struct type can be const (or constexpr), and just like all const variables, they must be initialized.

```cpp
	const Rectangle unit { 1.0, 1.0 };
    const Rectangle zero { }; // value-initialize all members
```

# Designated initializers

 A new way to initialize struct members called **designated initializers**. Designated initializers allow you to explicitly define which initialization values map to which members. The members can be initialized using list or copy initialization, and must be initialized in the same order in which they are declared in the struct, otherwise a warning or error will result. Members not designated an initializer will be value initialized.
 
```cpp
Foo f1{ .a{ 1 }, .c{ 3 } }; // ok: f1.a = 1, f1.b = 0 (value initialized), f1.c = 3
    Foo f2{ .a = 1, .c = 3 };   // ok: f2.a = 1, f2.b = 0 (value initialized), f2.c = 3
    Foo f3{ .b{ 2 }, .a{ 1 } }; // error: initialization order does not match order of declaration in struct
```

# Assignment with an initializer list

This is fine for single members, but not great when we want to update many members. Similar to initializing a struct with an initializer list, you can also assign values to structs using an initializer list (which does memberwise assignment):

```cpp
	Employee joe { 1, 32, 60000.0 };
    joe = { joe.id, 33, 66000.0 }; // Joe had a birthday and got a raise
```

# Assignment with designated initializers

Designated initializers can also be used in a list assignment:

```cpp
	Employee joe { 1, 32, 60000.0 };
    joe = { .id = joe.id, .age = 33, .wage = 66000.0 }; // Joe had a birthday and got a raise
```

Any members that aren’t designated in such an assignment will be assigned the value that would be used for value initialization. If we hadn’t have specified a designated initializer for `joe.id`, `joe.id` would have been assigned the value 0.
# Initializing a struct with another struct of the same type

A struct may also be initialized using another struct of the same type:

```cpp
{
    Foo foo { 1, 2, 3 };

    Foo x = foo; // copy initialization
    Foo y(foo);  // direct initialization
    Foo z {foo}; // list initialization
}
```