
When we define a struct (or class) type, we can provide a default initialization value for each member as part of the type definition. This process is called **non-static member initialization**, and the initialization value is called a **default member initializer**.

Here’s an example:

```cpp
struct Something
{
    int x;       // no initialization value (bad)
    int y {};    // value-initialized by default
    int z { 2 }; // explicit default value
};

int main()
{
    Something s1; // s1.x is uninitialized, s1.y is 0, and s1.z is 2

    return 0;
}
```

Note that even though we haven’t provided an explicit initializer for `s1.z`, it is initialized to a non-zero value because of the default member initializer provided.

# Explicit initialization values take precedence over default values

Explicit values in a list initializer always take precedence over default member initialization values.

```cpp
struct Something
{
    int x;       // no default initialization value (bad)
    int y {};    // value-initialized by default
    int z { 2 }; // explicit default value
};

int main()
{
    Something s2 { 5, 6, 7 }; // use explicit initializers for s2.x, s2.y, and s2.z (no default values are used)

    return 0;
}
```

In the above case, `s2` has explicit initialization values for every member, so the default member initialization values are not used at all. This means `s2.x`, `s2.y` and `s2.z` are initialized to the values `5`, `6`, and `7` respectively.

# Missing initializers in an initializer list when default values exist

We noted that if an aggregate is initialized but the number of initialization values is fewer than the number of members, then all remaining members will be value-initialized. However, if a default member initializer is provided for a given member, that default member initializer will be used instead.

```cpp
struct Something
{
    int x;       // no default initialization value (bad)
    int y {};    // value-initialized by default
    int z { 2 }; // explicit default value
};

int main()
{
    Something s3 {}; // value initialize s3.x, use default values for s3.y and s3.z

    return 0;
}
```

`s3.x` (which has no default member initializer) is value initialized to `0`, `s3.y` is value initialized by default to `0`, and `s3.z` is defaulted to value `2`.

# Recapping the initialization possibilities

If an aggregate is defined with an initialization list:

- If an explicit initialization value exists, that explicit value is used.
- If an initializer is missing and a default member initializer exists, the default is used.
- If an initializer is missing and no default member initializer exists, value initialization occurs.

If an aggregate is defined with no initialization list:

- If a default member initializer exists, the default is used.
- If no default member initializer exists, the member remains uninitialized.

Members are always initialized in the order of declaration.

# Always provide default values for your members

To avoid the possibility of uninitialized members, simply ensure that each member has a default value (either an explicit default value, or an empty pair of braces). That way, our members will be initialized with some value regardless of whether we provide an initializer list or not.

Consider the following struct, which has all members defaulted:

```cpp
struct Fraction
{
	int numerator { }; // we should use { 0 } here, but for the sake of example we'll use value initialization instead
	int denominator { 1 };
};
```