# Syntax and semantic errors
Errors generally fall into one of two categories: syntax errors, and semantic errors (logic errors).

A **syntax error** occurs when you write a statement that is not valid according to the grammar of the C++ language. This includes errors such as missing semicolons, using undeclared variables, mismatched parentheses or braces, etc…

A **semantic error** occurs when a statement is syntactically valid, but does not do what the programmer intended.

# A general approach to debugging

Once a problem has been identified, debugging the problem generally consists of five steps:

1. Find the root cause of the problem (usually the line of code that’s not working)
2. Ensure you understand why the issue is occurring
3. Determine how you’ll fix the issue
4. Repair the issue causing the problem
5. Retest to ensure the problem has been fixed and no new problems have emerged

## How to find errors.

### Finding problems via code inspection

Let’s say you’ve noticed a problem, and you want to track the cause of that specific problem down. In many cases (especially in smaller programs), we can quickly home in on the proximity of where the issue is.

However, as programs get more complex, finding issues by code inspection becomes more complex as well.

First, there’s a lot more code to look at. Looking at every line of code in a program that is thousands of lines long can take a really long time (not to mention it’s incredibly boring). Second, the code itself tends to be more complex, with more possible places for things to go wrong. Third, the code’s behavior may not give you many clues as to where things are going wrong. If you wrote a program to output stock recommendations and it actually output nothing at all, you probably wouldn’t have much of a lead on where to start looking for the problem.

Finally, bugs can be caused by making bad assumptions. It’s almost impossible to visually spot a bug caused by a bad assumption, because you’re likely to make the same bad assumption when inspecting the code, and not notice the error.

### Finding problems by running the program

Fortunately, if we can’t find an issue via code inspection, there is another avenue we can take: we can watch the behavior of the program as it runs, and try to diagnose the issue from that. This approach can be generalized as:

1. Figure out how to reproduce the problem
2. Run the program and gather information to narrow down where the problem is
3. Repeat the prior step until you find the problem

#### Reproducing the problem

The first and most important step in finding a problem is to be able to _reproduce the problem_. Reproducing the problem means making the problem appear in a consistent manner.

If a software issue is blatant (e.g. the program crashes in the same place every time you 
run it) then reproducing the problem can be trivial.

However, sometimes reproducing an issue can be a lot more difficult.
In such cases, generating a set of reproduction steps can be helpful. **Reproduction steps** are a list of clear and precise steps that can be followed to cause an issue to recur with a high level of predictability.

#### Homing in on issues

Once we can reasonably reproduce the problem, the next step is to figure out where in the code the problem is.

In the worst case, we may have no idea where the bug is. However, we do know that the problem must be somewhere in the code that executes between the beginning of the program and the point where the program exhibits the first incorrect symptom that we can observe. That at least rules out the parts of the program that execute after the first observable symptom. But that still potentially leaves a lot of code to cover. To diagnose the issue, we’ll make some educated guesses about where the problem is, with the goal of homing in on the problem quickly.

Often, whatever it was that caused us to notice the problem will give us an initial guess that’s close to where the actual problem is. For example, if the program isn’t writing data to a file when it should be, then the issue is probably somewhere in the code that handles writing to a file.