# Debugging tactic #1: Commenting out your code

If your program is exhibiting erroneous behavior, one way to reduce the amount of code you have to search through is to comment some code out and see if the issue persists. If the issue remains unchanged, the commented out code probably wasn’t responsible.

# Debugging tactic #2: Validating your code flow

Another problem common in more complex programs is that the program is calling a function too many or too few times (including not at all).

In such cases, it can be helpful to place statements at the top of your functions to print the function’s name. That way, when the program runs, you can see which functions are getting called.

TIP
	When printing information for debugging purposes, use std::cerr instead of std::cout. One reason for this is that std::cout may be buffered, which means there may be a pause between when you ask std::cout to output information and when it actually does. If you output using std::cout and then your program crashes immediately afterward, std::cout may or may not have actually output yet. This can mislead you about where the issue is. On the other hand, std::cerr is unbuffered, which means anything you send to it will output immediately. This helps ensure all debug output appears as soon as possible (at the cost of some performance, which we usually don’t care about when debugging).
	.
	Using std::cerr also helps make clear that the information being output is for an error case rather than a normal case.

# Debugging tactic #3: Printing values

With some types of bugs, the program may be calculating or passing the wrong value.

We can also output the value of variables (including parameters) or expressions to ensure that they are correct.

## Why using printing statements to debug isn’t great

While adding debug statements to programs for diagnostic purposes is a common rudimentary technique, and a functional one (especially when a debugger is not available for some reason), it’s not that great for a number of reasons:

1. Debug statements clutter your code.
2. Debug statements clutter the output of your program.
3. Debug statements require modification of your code to both add and to remove, which can introduce new bugs.
4. Debug statements must be removed after you’re done with them, which makes them non-reusable.

We can mitigate some of these issues. We’ll explore some basic techniques for doing so.

### Conditionalizing your debugging code

When you’re done with the debugging statement, you’ll either need to remove them, or comment them out. Then if you want them again later, you’ll have to add them back, or uncomment them.

One way to make it easier to disable and enable debugging throughout your program is to make your debugging statements conditional using preprocessor directives.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

#define ENABLE_DEBUG // comment out to disable debugging

int getUserInput()
{
#ifdef ENABLE_DEBUG
std::cerr << "getUserInput() called\n";
#endif
	std::cout << "Enter a number: ";
	int x{};
	std::cin >> x;
	return x;
}

int main()
{
#ifdef ENABLE_DEBUG
std::cerr << "main() called\n";
#endif
    int x{ getUserInput() };
    std::cout << "You entered: " << x << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

This allows us to reuse previously added debug statements and then just disable them when we’re done with them, rather than having to actually remove them from the code.

If this were a multi-file program, the \#define ENABLE_DEBUG would go in a header file that’s included into all code files so we can comment / uncomment the \#define in a single location and have it propagate to all code files.

### Using a logger

An alternative approach to conditionalized debugging via the preprocessor is to send your debugging information to a log. A **log** is a sequential record of events that have happened, usually time-stamped. The process of generating a log is called **logging**. Typically, logs are written to a file on disk (called a **log file**) so they can be reviewed later.

Log files have a few advantages. Because the information written to a log file is separated from your program’s output, you can avoid the clutter caused by mingling your normal output and debug output. Log files can also be easily sent to other people for diagnosis.

C++ contains an output stream named `std::clog` that is intended to be used for writing logging information. However, by default, `std::clog` writes to the standard error stream (the same as `std::cerr`). And while you can redirect it to file instead, this is one area where you’re generally better off using one of the many existing third-party logging tools available.

We’ll show what outputting to a logger looks like using the [plog](https://github.com/SergiusTheBest/plog) logger.

```cpp
#include <plog/Log.h> // Step 1: include the logger headers
#include <plog/Initializers/RollingFileInitializer.h>
#include <iostream>

int getUserInput()
{
	PLOGD << "getUserInput() called"; // PLOGD is defined by the plog library

	std::cout << "Enter a number: ";
	int x{};
	std::cin >> x;
	return x;
}

int main()
{
	plog::init(plog::debug, "Logfile.txt"); // Step 2: initialize the logger

	PLOGD << "main() called"; // Step 3: Output to the log as if you were writing to the console

	int x{ getUserInput() };
	std::cout << "You entered: " << x << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

Here’s output from the above logger (in the `Logfile.txt` file):

```Output
2018-12-26 20:03:33.295 DEBUG [4752] [main@19] main() called
2018-12-26 20:03:33.296 DEBUG [4752] [getUserInput@7] getUserInput() called
```

With plog, logging can be temporarily disabled by changing the init statement to the following:

```cpp
plog::init(plog::none , "Logfile.txt"); // plog::none eliminates writing of most messages, essentially turning logging off
```