
When you run your program, execution begins at the top of the _main_ function, and then proceeds sequentially statement by statement, until the program ends. At any point in time while your program is running, the program is keeping track of a lot of things: the value of the variables you’re using, which functions have been called (so that when those functions return, the program will know where to go back to), and the current point of execution within the program (so it knows which statement to execute next). All of this tracked information is called your **program state**

# The debugger

A **debugger** is a computer program that allows the programmer to control how another program executes and examine the program state while that program is running.

The power behind the debugger is twofold: the ability to precisely control execution of the program, and the ability to view (and modify, if desired) the program’s state.

# Stepping

**Stepping** is the name for a set of related debugger features that let us execute (step through) our code statement by statement.

## Step into

The **step into** command executes the next statement in the normal execution path of the program, and then pauses execution of the program so we can examine the program’s state using the debugger. If the statement being executed contains a function call, _step into_ causes the program to jump to the top of the function being called, where it will pause.

## Step over

Like _step into_, The **step over** command executes the next statement in the normal execution path of the program. However, whereas _step into_ will enter function calls and execute them line by line, _step over_ will execute an entire function without stopping and return control to you after the function has been executed.

## Step out

Unlike the other two stepping commands, **Step out** does not just execute the next line of code. Instead, it executes all remaining code in the function currently being executed, and then returns control to you when the function has returned.

## A step too far

When stepping through a program, you can normally only step forward. It’s very easy to accidentally step past (overstep) the place you wanted to examine.

If you step past your intended destination, the usual thing to do is stop debugging and restart debugging again, being a little more careful not to pass your target this time.

# Run to cursor

This **Run to cursor** command executes the program until execution reaches the statement selected by your cursor. Then it returns control to you so you can debug starting at that point. This makes for an efficient way to start debugging at a particular point in your code, or if already debugging, to move straight to some place you want to examine further.

# Continue

Once you’re in the middle of a debugging session, you may want to just run the program from that point forward. The easiest way to do this is to use the _continue_ command. The **continue** debug command simply continues running the program as per normal, either until the program terminates, or until something triggers control to return back to you again (such as a breakpoint, which we’ll cover later in this lesson).

# Start

The _continue_ command has a twin brother named _start_. The _start_ command performs the same action as _continue_, just starting from the beginning of the program. It can only be invoked when not already in a debug session.

# Breakpoints

A **breakpoint** is a special marker that tells the debugger to stop execution of the program at the breakpoint when running in debug mode.

# Set next statement

The **set next statement** command allows us to change the point of execution to some other statement (sometimes informally called _jumping_). This can be used to jump the point of execution forwards and skip some code that would otherwise execute, or backwards and have something that already executed run again.