# Watching variables

**Watching a variable** is the process of inspecting the value of a variable while the program is executing in debug mode. Most debuggers provide several ways to do this.

The easiest way to examine the value of a simple variable like x is to hover your mouse over the variable x. Some modern debuggers support this method of inspecting simple variables, and it is the most straightforward way to do so.

# The watch window

All modern integrated debuggers provide another feature, called a watch window. The **watch window** is a window where you can add variables you would like to continually inspect, and these variables will be updated as you step through your program. The watch window may already be on your screen when you enter debug mode, but if it is not, you can bring it up through your IDE’s window commands (these are typically found in a View or Debug menu).

>In VS Code, the watch window appears in debug mode, docked on the left above the call stack.

The watches window may or may not contain anything in it already.

There are typically two different ways to add variables to the watch window:

1. Pull up the watch window, and type in the name of the variable you would like to watch in the leftmost column of the watch window.
2. In the code window, right click on the variable you’d like to watch, and choose _Add Watch_ (Visual Studio) or _Watch x_ (replace x with the variable’s name) (Code::Blocks).


Variables that go out of scope (e.g. a local variable inside a function that has already returned to the caller) will stay in your watch window, but will generally either be marked as “not available”, or may show the last known value but grayed out. If the variable returns to scope (e.g. the function is called again), its value will begin showing again. Therefore, it’s fine to leave variables in the watch window, even if they’re out of scope

## Setting a breakpoint on watched variables

Some debuggers will allow you to set a breakpoint on a watched variable rather than a line. This will cause the program to stop execution whenever the value of that variable changes.

## The watch window can evaluate expressions too

The watch window will also allow you to evaluate simple expressions.(Eg. x+2)

You can also highlight an expression in your code and then inspect the value of that expression via hover or by adding it to the watch window via the right-click context menu.

## Local watches

Because inspecting the value of local variables inside a function is common while debugging, many debuggers will offer some way to quickly watch the value of _all_ local variables in scope.