# A case for sorting

Sorting an array is the process of arranging all of the elements in the array in a particular order.

It turns out that there are even better algorithms to search sorted arrays. Using a simple algorithm, we can search a sorted array containing 1,000,000 elements using only 20 comparisons! The downside is, of course, that sorting an array is comparatively expensive, and it often isn’t worth sorting an array in order to make searching fast unless you’re going to be searching it many times.

# How sorting works

Sorting is generally performed by repeatedly comparing pairs of array elements, and swapping them if they meet some predefined criteria. The order in which these elements are compared differs depending on which sorting algorithm is used. The criteria depends on how the list will be sorted.

To swap two elements, we can use the std::swap() function from the C++ standard library, which is defined in the utility header.

# Selection sort

There are many ways to sort an array. Selection sort is probably the easiest sort to understand, which makes it a good candidate for teaching even though it is one of the slower sorts.

Selection sort performs the following steps to sort an array from smallest to largest:

1. Starting at array index 0, search the entire array to find the smallest value
2. Swap the smallest value found in the array with the value at index 0
3. Repeat steps 1 & 2 starting from the next index

In other words, we’re going to find the smallest element in the array, and swap it into the first position. Then we’re going to find the next smallest element, and swap it into the second position. This process will be repeated until we run out of elements.

Here is an example of this algorithm working on 5 elements. Let’s start with a sample array:

{ 30, 50, 20, 10, 40 }

First, we find the smallest element, starting from index 0:

{ 30, 50, 20, **10**, 40 }

We then swap this with the element at index 0:

{ **10**, 50, 20, **30**, 40 }

Now that the first element is sorted, we can ignore it. Now, we find the smallest element, starting from index 1:

{ _10_, 50, **20**, 30, 40 }

And swap it with the element in index 1:

{ _10_, **20**, **50**, 30, 40 }

Now we can ignore the first two elements. Find the smallest element starting at index 2:

{ _10_, _20_, 50, **30**, 40 }

And swap it with the element in index 2:

{ _10_, _20_, **30**, **50**, 40 }

Find the smallest element starting at index 3:

{ _10_, _20_, _30_, 50, **40** }

And swap it with the element in index 3:

{ _10_, _20_, _30_, **40**, **50** }

Finally, find the smallest element starting at index 4:

{ _10_, _20_, _30_, _40_, **50** }

And swap it with the element in index 4 (which doesn’t do anything):

{ _10_, _20_, _30_, _40_, **50** }

Done!

{ 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 }

Note that the last comparison will always be with itself (which is redundant), so we can actually stop 1 element before the end of the array.

# Selection sort in C++

Here’s how this algorithm is implemented in C++:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <iterator>
#include <utility>

int main()
{
	int array[]{ 30, 50, 20, 10, 40 };
	constexpr int length{ static_cast<int>(std::size(array)) };

	// Step through each element of the array
	// (except the last one, which will already be sorted by the time we get there)
	for (int startIndex{ 0 }; startIndex < length - 1; ++startIndex)
	{
		// smallestIndex is the index of the smallest element we’ve encountered this iteration
		// Start by assuming the smallest element is the first element of this iteration
		int smallestIndex{ startIndex };

		// Then look for a smaller element in the rest of the array
		for (int currentIndex{ startIndex + 1 }; currentIndex < length; ++currentIndex)
		{
			// If we've found an element that is smaller than our previously found smallest
			if (array[currentIndex] < array[smallestIndex])
				// then keep track of it
				smallestIndex = currentIndex;
		}

		// smallestIndex is now the index of the smallest element in the remaining array
                // swap our start element with our smallest element (this sorts it into the correct place)
		std::swap(array[startIndex], array[smallestIndex]);
	}

	// Now that the whole array is sorted, print our sorted array as proof it works
	for (int index{ 0 }; index < length; ++index)
		std::cout << array[index] << ' ';

	std::cout << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

# std::sort

Because sorting arrays is so common, the C++ standard library includes a sorting function named `std::sort`. `std::sort` lives in the \<algorithm> header, and can be invoked on an array like so:

```cpp
#include <algorithm> // for std::sort
#include <iostream>
#include <iterator> // for std::size

int main()
{
	int array[]{ 30, 50, 20, 10, 40 };

	std::sort(std::begin(array), std::end(array));

	for (int i{ 0 }; i < static_cast<int>(std::size(array)); ++i)
		std::cout << array[i] << ' ';

	std::cout << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

By default, std::sort sorts in ascending order using operator< to compare pairs of elements and swapping them if necessary (much like our selection sort example does above).