# Templates and container classes

Creating template classes works pretty much identically to creating template functions, so we’ll proceed by example. Here’s our array class, templated version:

Array.h:

```cpp
#ifndef ARRAY_H
#define ARRAY_H

#include <cassert>

template <typename T> // added
class Array
{
private:
    int m_length{};
    T* m_data{}; // changed type to T

public:

    Array(int length)
    {
        assert(length > 0);
        m_data = new T[length]{}; // allocated an array of objects of type T
        m_length = length;
    }

    Array(const Array&) = delete;
    Array& operator=(const Array&) = delete;

    ~Array()
    {
        delete[] m_data;
    }

    void erase()
    {
        delete[] m_data;
        // We need to make sure we set m_data to 0 here, otherwise it will
        // be left pointing at deallocated memory!
        m_data = nullptr;
        m_length = 0;
    }

    // templated operator[] function defined below
    T& operator[](int index); // now returns a T&

    int getLength() const { return m_length; }
};

// member functions defined outside the class need their own template declaration
template <typename T>
T& Array<T>::operator[](int index) // now returns a T&
{
    assert(index >= 0 && index < m_length);
    return m_data[index];
}

#endif
```

 Each templated member function defined outside the class declaration needs its own template declaration. Also, note that the name of the templated array class is Array\<T>, not Array -- Array would refer to a non-templated version of a class named Array, unless Array is used inside of the class. For example, the copy constructor and copy-assignment operator used Array rather than Array\<T>.

# Template classes in the standard library

Now that we’ve covered template classes, you should understand what std::vector\<int> means now -- std::vector is actually a template class, and int is the type parameter to the template! The standard library is full of predefined template classes available for your use.

# Splitting up template classes

With non-template classes, the common procedure is to put the class definition in a header file, and the member function definitions in a similarly named code file. In this way, the member function definitions are compiled as a separate project file. However, with templates, this does not work. 

There are quite a few ways to work around this.

The easiest way is to simply put all of your template class code in the header file (in this case, put the contents of Array.cpp into Array.h, below the class). In this way, when you \#include the header, all of the template code will be in one place. The upside of this solution is that it is simple. The downside here is that if the template class is used in many files, you will end up with many local instances of the template class, which can increase your compile and link times (your linker should remove the duplicate definitions, so it shouldn’t bloat your executable). This is our preferred solution unless the compile or link times start to become a problem.

If you feel that putting the Array.cpp code into the Array.h header makes the header too long/messy, an alternative is to move the contents of Array.cpp to a new file named Array.inl (.inl stands for inline), and then include Array.inl at the bottom of the Array.h header (inside the header guard). That yields the same result as putting all the code in the header, but helps keep things a little more organized.

Another alternative is to use a three-file approach. The template class definition goes in the header. The template class member functions goes in the code file. Then you add a third file, which contains _all_ of the instantiated classes you need:

templates.cpp:

```cpp
// Ensure the full Array template definition can be seen
#include "Array.h"
#include "Array.cpp" // we're breaking best practices here, but only in this one place

// #include other .h and .cpp template definitions you need here

template class Array<int>; // Explicitly instantiate template Array<int>
template class Array<double>; // Explicitly instantiate template Array<double>

// instantiate other templates here
```

The “template class” command causes the compiler to explicitly instantiate the template class. In the above case, the compiler will stencil out definitions for Array\<int> and Array\<double> inside of templates.cpp. Other code files that want to use these types can include Array.h (to satisfy the compiler), and the linker will link in these explicit type definitions from template.cpp.

This method may be more efficient (depending on how your compiler and linker handle templates and duplicate definitions), but requires maintaining the templates.cpp file for each program.
