
**Function overloading** allows us to create multiple functions with the same name, so long as each identically named function has different parameter types (or the functions can be otherwise differentiated). Each function sharing a name (in the same scope) is called an **overloaded function** (sometimes called an **overload** for short).

```cpp
int add(int x, int y) // integer version
{
    return x + y;
}

double add(double x, double y) // floating point version
{
    return x + y;
}

int main()
{
    return 0;
}
```

The above program will compile. Although you might expect these functions to result in a naming conflict, that is not the case here. Because the parameter types of these functions differ, the compiler is able to differentiate these functions, and will treat them as separate functions that just happen to share a name.

# Introduction to overload resolution

Additionally, when a function call is made to a function that has been overloaded, the compiler will try to match the function call to the appropriate overload based on the arguments used in the function call. This is called **overload resolution**.

# Making it compile

In order for a program using overloaded functions to compile, two things have to be true:

1. Each overloaded function has to be differentiated from the others.
2. Each call to an overloaded function has to resolve to an overloaded function.

If an overloaded function is not differentiated, or if a function call to an overloaded function can not be resolved to an overloaded function, then a compile error will result.