With overloaded functions, there can be many functions that can potentially match a function call. Since a function call can only resolve to one of them, the compiler has to determine which overloaded function is the best match. The process of matching function calls to a specific overloaded function is called **overload resolution**.

# Resolving overloaded function calls

When a function call is made to an overloaded function, the compiler steps through a sequence of rules to determine which (if any) of the overloaded functions is the best match.

At each step, the compiler applies a bunch of different type conversions to the argument(s) in the function call. For each conversion applied, the compiler checks if any of the overloaded functions are now a match. After all the different type conversions have been applied and checked for matches, the step is done. The result will be one of three possible outcomes:

- No matching functions were found. The compiler moves to the next step in the sequence.
- A single matching function was found. This function is considered to be the best match. The matching process is now complete, and subsequent steps are not executed.
- More than one matching function was found. The compiler will issue an ambiguous match compile error.

If the compiler reaches the end of the entire sequence without finding a match, it will generate a compile error that no matching overloaded function could be found for the function call.

# The argument matching sequence

## Step 1) 
The compiler tries to find an exact match. This happens in two phases. First, the compiler will see if there is an overloaded function where the type of the arguments in the function call exactly matches the type of the parameters in the overloaded functions. For example:

```cpp
void print(int)
{
}

void print(double)
{
}

int main()
{
    print(0); // exact match with print(int)
    print(3.4); // exact match with print(double)

    return 0;
}
```

Second, the compiler will apply a number of trivial conversions to the arguments in the function call. The **trivial conversions** are a set of specific conversion rules that will modify types (without modifying the value) for purposes of finding a match. For example, a non-const type can be trivially converted to a const type:

```cpp
void print(const int)
{
}

void print(double)
{
}

int main()
{
    int x { 0 };
    print(x); // x trivially converted to const int

    return 0;
}
```

## Step 2)

If no exact match is found, the compiler tries to find a match by applying numeric promotion to the argument(s). If, after numeric promotion, a match is found, the function call is resolved.

For example:

```cpp
void print(int)
{
}

void print(double)
{
}

int main()
{
    print('a'); // promoted to match print(int)
    print(true); // promoted to match print(int)
    print(4.5f); // promoted to match print(double)

    return 0;
}
```

## Step 3)

If no match is found via numeric promotion, the compiler tries to find a match by applying numeric conversions to the arguments.

For example:

```cpp
#include <string> // for std::string

void print(double)
{
}

void print(std::string)
{
}

int main()
{
    print('a'); // 'a' converted to match print(double)

    return 0;
}
```

## Step 4) 
If no match is found via numeric conversion, the compiler tries to find a match through any user-defined conversions. Although we haven’t covered user-defined conversions yet, certain types (e.g. classes) can define conversions to other types that can be implicitly invoked. Here’s an example, just to illustrate the point:

```cpp
// We haven't covered classes yet, so don't worry if this doesn't make sense
class X // this defines a new type called X
{
public:
    operator int() { return 0; } // Here's a user-defined conversion from X to int
};

void print(int)
{
}

void print(double)
{
}

int main()
{
    X x; // Here, we're creating an object of type X (named x)
    print(x); // x is converted to type int using the user-defined conversion from X to int

    return 0;
}
```

## Step 5) 
If no match is found via user-defined conversion, the compiler will look for a matching function that uses ellipsis.

## Step 6) 
If no matches have been found by this point, the compiler gives up and will issue a compile error about not being able to find a matching function.

# Ambiguous matches

With non-overloaded functions, each function call will either resolve to a function, or no match will be found and the compiler will issue a compile error.

With overloaded functions, there is a third possible outcome: an `ambiguous match` may be found. An **ambiguous match** occurs when the compiler finds two or more functions that can be made to match in the same step. When this occurs, the compiler will stop matching and issue a compile error stating that it has found an ambiguous function call.

Since every overloaded function must be differentiated in order to compile, you might be wondering how it is possible that a function call could result in more than one match. Let’s take a look at an example that illustrates this:

```cpp
void print(int)
{
}

void print(double)
{
}

int main()
{
    print(5L); // 5L is type long

    return 0;
}
```

Since literal `5L` is of type `long`, the compiler will first look to see if it can find an exact match for `print(long)`, but it will not find one. Next, the compiler will try numeric promotion, but values of type `long` can’t be promoted, so there is no match here either.

Following that, the compiler will try to find a match by applying numeric conversions to the `long` argument. In the process of checking all the numeric conversion rules, the compiler will find two potential matches. If the `long` argument is numerically converted into an `int`, then the function call will match `print(int)`. If the `long` argument is instead converted into a `double`, then it will match `print(double)` instead. Since two possible matches via numeric conversion have been found, the function call is considered ambiguous.

On Visual Studio 2019, this results in the following error message:

```Output
error C2668: 'print': ambiguous call to overloaded function
message : could be 'void print(double)'
message : or       'void print(int)'
message : while trying to match the argument list '(long)'
```

# Resolving ambiguous matches

1. Often, the best way is simply to define a new overloaded function that takes parameters of exactly the type you are trying to call the function with. Then C++ will be able to find an exact match for the function call.
2. Alternatively, explicitly cast the ambiguous argument(s) to match the type of the function you want to call. For example, to have `print(0)` match `print(unsigned int)` in the above example, you would do this:
```cpp
int x{ 0 };
print(static_cast<unsigned int>(x)); // will call print(unsigned int)
```

3. If your argument is a literal, you can use the literal suffix to ensure your literal is interpreted as the correct type:

```cpp
print(0u); // will call print(unsigned int) since 'u' suffix is unsigned int, so this is now an exact match
```

# Matching for functions with multiple arguments

If there are multiple arguments, the compiler applies the matching rules to each argument in turn. The function chosen is the one for which each argument matches at least as well as all the other functions, with at least one argument matching better than all the other functions. In other words, the function chosen must provide a better match than all the other candidate functions for at least one parameter, and no worse for all of the other parameters.

In the case that such a function is found, it is clearly and unambiguously the best choice. If no such function can be found, the call will be considered ambiguous (or a non-match).