In C++, the template system was designed to simplify the process of creating functions (or classes) that are able to work with different data types.

Instead of manually creating a bunch of mostly-identical functions or classes (one for each set of different types), we instead create a single _template_. Just like a normal definition, a **template** describes what a function or class looks like. Unlike a normal definition (where all types must be specified), in a template we can use one or more placeholder types. A placeholder type represents some type that is not known at the time the template is written, but that will be provided later.

Once a template is defined, the compiler can use the template to generate as many overloaded functions (or classes) as needed, each using different actual types!

The end result is the same -- we end up with a bunch of mostly-identical functions or classes (one for each set of different types). But we only have to create and maintain a single template, and the compiler does all the hard work for us.

# Function templates

A **function template** is a function-like definition that is used to generate one or more overloaded functions, each with a different set of actual types. This is what will allow us to create functions that can work with many different types.

When we create our function template, we use placeholder types (also called **type template parameters**, or informally **template types**) for any parameter types, return types, or types used in the function body that we want to be specified later.

# Creating a templated max function

Here’s the int version of `max` again:

```cpp
int max(int x, int y)
{
    return (x < y) ? y : x;
}
```

Note that we use type `int` three times in this function: once for parameter `x`, once for parameter `y`, and once for the return type of the function.

To create a function template, we’re going to do two things. 
First, we’re going to replace our specific types with type template parameters. In this case, because we have only one type that needs replacing (`int`), we only need one type template parameter (which we’ll call `T`):

Here’s our new function that uses a single template type:

```cpp
T max(T x, T y) // won't compile because we haven't defined T
{
    return (x < y) ? y : x;
}
```

Second, we’re going to tell the compiler that this is a function template, and that `T` is a type template parameter that is a placeholder for any type. This is done using what is called a **template parameter declaration**. The scope of a template parameter declaration is limited to the function template (or class template) that follows. Therefore, each function template (or class) needs its own template parameter declaration.

```cpp
template <typename T> // this is the template parameter declaration
T max(T x, T y) // this is the function template definition for max<T>
{
    return (x < y) ? y : x;
}
```

# Naming template parameters

Much like we often use a single letter for variable names used in trivial situations (e.g. `x`), it’s a common convention to use a single capital letter (starting with `T`) when the meaning of that type is trivial or obvious.

If a type template parameter has a non-obvious usage or meaning, then a more descriptive name is warranted. There are two common conventions for such names:

- Starting with a capital letter (e.g. `Allocator`). The standard library uses this naming convention.
- Prefixed with a `T`, then starting with a capital letter (e.g. `TAllocator`). This makes it easier to see that the type is a type template parameter.