# Using a function template

Function templates are not actually functions -- their code isn’t compiled or executed directly. Instead, function templates have one job: to generate functions (that are compiled and executed).

To use our `max<T>` function template, we can make a function call with the following #Syntax :

```cpp
max<actual_type>(arg1, arg2); // actual_type is some actual type, like int or double
```

This looks a lot like a normal function call -- the primary difference is the addition of the type in angled brackets (called a **template argument**), which specifies the actual type that will be used in place of template type `T`.

Let’s take a look at this in a simple example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

template <typename T>
T max(T x, T y)
{
    return (x < y) ? y : x;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << max<int>(1, 2) << '\n'; // instantiates and calls function max<int>(int, int)

    return 0;
}
```

The process of creating functions (with specific types) from function templates (with template types) is called **function template instantiation** (or **instantiation** for short). When this process happens due to a function call, it’s called **implicit instantiation**. An instantiated function is often called a **function instance** (**instance** for short) or a **template function**. Function instances are normal functions in all regards.

A function template is only instantiated the first time a function call is made in each translation unit. Further calls to the function are routed to the already instantiated function.

# Template argument deduction

In cases where the type of the arguments match the actual type we want, we do not need to specify the actual type -- instead, we can use **template argument deduction** to have the compiler deduce the actual type that should be used from the argument types in the function call.

For example, instead of making a function call like this:

```cpp
std::cout << max<int>(1, 2) << '\n'; // specifying we want to call max<int>
```

We can do one of these instead:
```cpp
std::cout << max<>(1, 2) << '\n';
std::cout << max(1, 2) << '\n';
```

The difference between the two cases has to do with how the compiler resolves the function call from a set of overloaded functions. In the top case (with the empty angled brackets), the compiler will only consider `max<int>` template function overloads when determining which overloaded function to call. In the bottom case (with no angled brackets), the compiler will consider both `max<int>` template function overloads and `max` non-template function overloads.

For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

template <typename T>
T max(T x, T y)
{
    std::cout << "called max<int>(int, int)\n";
    return (x < y) ? y : x;
}

int max(int x, int y)
{
    std::cout << "called max(int, int)\n";
    return (x < y) ? y : x;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << max<int>(1, 2) << '\n'; // calls max<int>(int, int)
    std::cout << max<>(1, 2) << '\n';    // deduces max<int>(int, int) (non-template functions not considered)
    std::cout << max(1, 2) << '\n';      // calls max(int, int)

    return 0;
}
```

Note how the syntax in the bottom case looks identical to a normal function call! In most cases, this normal function call syntax will be the one we use to call functions instantiated from a function template.

There are a few reasons for this:

- The syntax is more concise.
- It’s rare that we’ll have both a matching non-template function and a function template.
- If we do have a matching non-template function and a matching function template, we will usually prefer the non-template function to be called.

# Function templates with non-template parameters

It’s possible to create function templates that have both template parameters and non-template parameters. The type template parameters can be matched to any type, and the non-template parameters work like the parameters of normal functions.

For example:

```cpp
// T is a type template parameter
// double is a non-template parameter
template <typename T>
int someFcn (T, double)
{
    return 5;
}

int main()
{
    someFcn(1, 3.4); // matches someFcn(int, double)
    someFcn(1, 3.4f); // matches someFcn(int, double) -- the float is promoted to a double
    someFcn(1.2, 3.4); // matches someFcn(double, double)
    someFcn(1.2f, 3.4); // matches someFcn(float, double)
    someFcn(1.2f, 3.4f); // matches someFcn(float, double) -- the float is promoted to a double

    return 0;
}
```

# Instantiated functions may not always compile

Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

template <typename T>
T addOne(T x)
{
    return x + 1;
}

int main()
{
    std::string hello { "Hello, world!" };
    std::cout << addOne(hello) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

When the compiler tries to resolve `addOne(hello)` it won’t find a non-template function match for `addOne(std::string)`, but it will find our function template for `addOne(T)`, and determine that it can generate an `addOne(std::string)` function from it. Thus, the compiler will generate and compile this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

template <typename T>
T addOne(T x);

template<>
std::string addOne<std::string>(std::string x)
{
    return x + 1;
}

int main()
{
    std::string hello{ "Hello, world!" };
    std::cout << addOne(hello) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

However, this will generate a compile error, because `x + 1` doesn’t make sense when `x` is a `std::string`. The obvious solution here is simply not to call `addOne()` with an argument of type `std::string`.

# Disallowing instantiation of function templates with certain argument

We can tell the compiler that instantiation of function templates with certain arguments should be disallowed. This is done by using function template specialization, which allow us to overload an function template for a specific set of template arguments, along with `= delete`, which tells the compiler that any use of the function should emit a compilation error.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

template <typename T>
T addOne(T x)
{
    return x + 1;
}

// Use function template specialization to tell the compiler that addOne(const char*) should emit a compilation error
// const char* will match a string literal
template <>
const char* addOne(const char* x) = delete;

int main()
{
    std::cout << addOne("Hello, world!") << '\n'; // compile error

    return 0;
}
```

# Using function templates in multiple files

Consider the following program, which doesn’t work correctly:

main.cpp:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

template <typename T>
T addOne(T x); // function template forward declaration

int main()
{
    std::cout << addOne(1) << '\n';
    std::cout << addOne(2.3) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

add.cpp:

```cpp
template <typename T>
T addOne(T x) // function template definition
{
    return x + 1;
}
```

If `addOne` were a non-template function, this program would work fine: In _main.cpp_, the compiler would be satisfied with the forward declaration of `addOne`, and the linker would connect the call to `addOne()` in _main.cpp_ to the function definition in _add.cpp_.

But because `addOne` is a template, this program doesn’t work, and we get a linker error:

```Output
1>Project6.obj : error LNK2019: unresolved external symbol "int __cdecl addOne<int>(int)" (??$addOne@H@@YAHH@Z) referenced in function _main
1>Project6.obj : error LNK2019: unresolved external symbol "double __cdecl addOne<double>(double)" (??$addOne@N@@YANN@Z) referenced in function _main
```

In _main.cpp_, we call `addOne<int>` and `addOne<double>`. However, since the compiler can’t see the definition for function template `addOne`, it can’t instantiate those functions inside _main.cpp_. It does see the forward declaration for `addOne` though, and will assume those functions exist elsewhere and will be linked in later.

When the compiler goes to compile _add.cpp_, it will see the definition for function template `addOne`. However, there are no uses of this template in _add.cpp_, so the compiler will not instantiate anything. The end result is that the linker is unable to connect the calls to `addOne<int>` and `addOne<double>` in _main.cpp_ to the actual functions, because those functions were never instantiated.

The most conventional way to address this issue is to put all your template code in a header (.h) file instead of a source (.cpp) file:

add.h:

```cpp
#ifndef ADD_H
#define ADD_H

template <typename T>
T addOne(T x) // function template definition
{
    return x + 1;
}

#endif
```

main.cpp:

```cpp
#include "add.h" // import the function template definition
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << addOne(1) << '\n';
    std::cout << addOne(2.3) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

That way, any files that need access to the template can \#include the relevant header, and the template definition will be copied by the preprocessor into the source file. The compiler will then be able to instantiate any functions that are needed.

You may be wondering why this doesn’t cause a violation of the one-definition rule (ODR). The ODR says that types, templates, inline functions, and inline variables are allowed to have identical definitions in different files. So there is no problem if the template definition is copied into multiple files (as long as each definition is identical).

But what about the instantiated functions themselves? If a function is instantiated in multiple files, how does that not cause a violation of the ODR? The answer is that functions implicitly instantiated from templates are implicitly inline. And as you know, inline functions can be defined in multiple files, so long as the definition is identical in each.

# Conclusion

Once you get used to writing function templates, you’ll find they actually don’t take much longer to write than functions with actual types. Function templates can significantly reduce code maintenance and errors by minimizing the amount of code that needs to be written and maintained.

Function templates do have a few drawbacks, and we would be remiss not to mention them. First, the compiler will create (and compile) a function for each function call with a unique set of argument types. So while function templates are compact to write, they can expand into a crazy amount of code, which can lead to code bloat and slow compile times. The bigger downside of function templates is that they tend to produce crazy-looking, borderline unreadable error messages that are much harder to decipher than those of regular functions. These error messages can be quite intimidating, but once you understand what they are trying to tell you, the problems they are pinpointing are often quite straightforward to resolve.