C++11 adds a new type of reference called an r-value reference. An r-value reference is a reference that is designed to be initialized with an r-value (only). While an l-value reference is created using a single ampersand, an r-value reference is created using a double ampersand:

```cpp
int x{ 5 };
int& lref{ x }; // l-value reference initialized with l-value x
int&& rref{ 5 }; // r-value reference initialized with r-value 5
```

R-values references cannot be initialized with l-values.

| R-value reference       | Can be initialized with | Can modify |
| ----------------------- | ----------------------- | ---------- |
| Modifiable l-values     | No                      | No         |
| Non-modifiable l-values | No                      | No         |
| R-values                | Yes                     | Yes        |

R-value references have two properties that are useful. 
First, r-value references extend the lifespan of the object they are initialized with to the lifespan of the r-value reference (l-value references to const objects can do this too). 
Second, non-const r-value references allow you to modify the r-value!

# R-value references as function parameters

R-value references are more often used as function parameters. This is most useful for function overloads when you want to have different behavior for l-value and r-value arguments.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void fun(const int& lref) // l-value arguments will select this function
{
	std::cout << "l-value reference to const: " << lref << '\n';
}

void fun(int&& rref) // r-value arguments will select this function
{
	std::cout << "r-value reference: " << rref << '\n';
}

int main()
{
	int x{ 5 };
	fun(x); // l-value argument calls l-value version of function
	fun(5); // r-value argument calls r-value version of function

	return 0;
}
```

```Output
l-value reference to const: 5
r-value reference: 5
```

# Rvalue reference variables are lvalues

Consider the following snippet:

```cpp
int&& ref{ 5 };
fun(ref);
```

This calls `fun(const int&)`.

Although variable `ref` has type `int&&`, when used in an expression it is an lvalue (as are all named variables). The type of an object and its value category are independent.

# Returning an r-value reference

You should almost never return an r-value reference, for the same reason you should almost never return an l-value reference. In most cases, you’ll end up returning a hanging reference when the referenced object goes out of scope at the end of the function.