# Move constructors and move assignment

C++11 defines two new functions in service of move semantics: a move constructor, and a move assignment operator. Whereas the goal of the copy constructor and copy assignment is to make a copy of one object to another, the goal of the move constructor and move assignment is to move ownership of the resources from one object to another (which is typically much less expensive than making a copy).

Defining a move constructor and move assignment work analogously to their copy counterparts. However, whereas the copy flavors of these functions take a const l-value reference parameter (which will bind to just about anything), the move flavors of these functions use non-const rvalue reference parameters (which only bind to rvalues).

Here’s the same Auto_ptr3 class as above, with a move constructor and move assignment operator added. We’ve left in the deep-copying copy constructor and copy assignment operator for comparison purposes.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

template<typename T>
class Auto_ptr4
{
	T* m_ptr {};
public:
	Auto_ptr4(T* ptr = nullptr)
		: m_ptr { ptr }
	{
	}

	~Auto_ptr4()
	{
		delete m_ptr;
	}

	// Copy constructor
	// Do deep copy of a.m_ptr to m_ptr
	Auto_ptr4(const Auto_ptr4& a)
	{
		m_ptr = new T;
		*m_ptr = *a.m_ptr;
	}

	// Move constructor
	// Transfer ownership of a.m_ptr to m_ptr
	Auto_ptr4(Auto_ptr4&& a) noexcept
		: m_ptr(a.m_ptr)
	{
		a.m_ptr = nullptr; // we'll talk more about this line below
	}

	// Copy assignment
	// Do deep copy of a.m_ptr to m_ptr
	Auto_ptr4& operator=(const Auto_ptr4& a)
	{
		// Self-assignment detection
		if (&a == this)
			return *this;

		// Release any resource we're holding
		delete m_ptr;

		// Copy the resource
		m_ptr = new T;
		*m_ptr = *a.m_ptr;

		return *this;
	}

	// Move assignment
	// Transfer ownership of a.m_ptr to m_ptr
	Auto_ptr4& operator=(Auto_ptr4&& a) noexcept
	{
		// Self-assignment detection
		if (&a == this)
			return *this;

		// Release any resource we're holding
		delete m_ptr;

		// Transfer ownership of a.m_ptr to m_ptr
		m_ptr = a.m_ptr;
		a.m_ptr = nullptr; // we'll talk more about this line below

		return *this;
	}

	T& operator*() const { return *m_ptr; }
	T* operator->() const { return m_ptr; }
	bool isNull() const { return m_ptr == nullptr; }
};

class Resource
{
public:
	Resource() { std::cout << "Resource acquired\n"; }
	~Resource() { std::cout << "Resource destroyed\n"; }
};

Auto_ptr4<Resource> generateResource()
{
	Auto_ptr4<Resource> res{new Resource};
	return res; // this return value will invoke the move constructor
}

int main()
{
	Auto_ptr4<Resource> mainres;
	mainres = generateResource(); // this assignment will invoke the move assignment

	return 0;
}
```

The move constructor and move assignment operator are simple. Instead of deep copying the source object (a) into the implicit object, we simply move (steal) the source object’s resources. This involves shallow copying the source pointer into the implicit object, then setting the source pointer to null.

When run, this program prints:

```Output
Resource acquired
Resource destroyed
```

The flow of the program is exactly the same as before. However, instead of calling the copy constructor and copy assignment operators, this program calls the move constructor and move assignment operators. Looking a little more deeply:

1. Inside generateResource(), local variable res is created and initialized with a dynamically allocated Resource, which causes the first “Resource acquired”.
2. Res is returned back to main() by value. Res is move constructed into a temporary object, transferring the dynamically created object stored in res to the temporary object. We’ll talk about why this happens below.
3. Res goes out of scope. Because res no longer manages a pointer (it was moved to the temporary), nothing interesting happens here.
4. The temporary object is move assigned to mainres. This transfers the dynamically created object stored in the temporary to mainres.
5. The assignment expression ends, and the temporary object goes out of expression scope and is destroyed. However, because the temporary no longer manages a pointer (it was moved to mainres), nothing interesting happens here either.
6. At the end of main(), mainres goes out of scope, and our final “Resource destroyed” is displayed.

# When are the move constructor and move assignment called?

The move constructor and move assignment are called when those functions have been defined, and the argument for construction or assignment is an rvalue. Most typically, this rvalue will be a literal or temporary value.

The copy constructor and copy assignment are used otherwise (when the argument is an lvalue, or when the argument is an rvalue and the move constructor or move assignment functions aren’t defined).

#  Implicit move constructor and move assignment operator

The compiler will create an implicit move constructor and move assignment operator if all of the following are true:

- There are no user-declared copy constructors or copy assignment operators.
- There are no user-declared move constructors or move assignment operators.
- There is no user-declared destructor.

The implicit move constructor and implicit move assignment operator both do a memberwise move. That is, each member of the moved-from object is moved to the moved-to object.

# The key insight behind move semantics

If we construct an object or do an assignment where the argument is an l-value, the only thing we can reasonably do is copy the l-value. We can’t assume it’s safe to alter the l-value, because it may be used again later in the program. If we have an expression “a = b” (where b is an lvalue), we wouldn’t reasonably expect b to be changed in any way.

However, if we construct an object or do an assignment where the argument is an r-value, then we know that r-value is just a temporary object of some kind. Instead of copying it (which can be expensive), we can simply transfer its resources (which is cheap) to the object we’re constructing or assigning. This is safe to do because the temporary will be destroyed at the end of the expression anyway, so we know it will never be used again!

# Move functions should always leave both objects in a valid state

The C++ specification has a special rule that says automatic objects returned from a function by value can be moved even if they are l-values. This makes sense, since res was going to be destroyed at the end of the function anyway! We might as well steal its resources instead of making an expensive and unnecessary copy.

Although the compiler can move l-value return values, in some cases it may be able to do even better by simply eliding the copy altogether (which avoids the need to make a copy or do a move at all). In such a case, neither the copy constructor nor move constructor would be called.

# Disabling copying

```cpp

	// Copy constructor -- no copying allowed!
	Auto_ptr5(const Auto_ptr5& a) = delete;
```

```cpp
// Copy assignment -- no copying allowed!
	Auto_ptr5& operator=(const Auto_ptr5& a) = delete;
```

# Do not implement move semantics using std::swap

Since the goal of move semantics is to move a resource from a source object to a destination object, you might think about implementing the move constructor and move assignment operator using `std::swap()`. However, this is a bad idea, as `std::swap()` calls both the move constructor and move assignment on move-capable objects, which would result in an infinite recursion.

You can implement the move constructor and move assignment using your own swap function, as long as your swap member function does not call the move constructor or move assignment. Here’s an example of how that can be done:

```cpp
// Create our own swap friend function to swap the members of Name
    friend void swap(Name& a, Name& b) noexcept
    {
        // We avoid recursive calls by invoking std::swap on the std::string member,
        // not on Name
        std::swap(a.m_name, b.m_name);
    }

    Name(Name&& name)
    {
        std::cout << "Move ctor\n";

        swap(*this, name); // Now calling our swap, not std::swap
    }

    Name& operator=(Name&& name)
    {
        std::cout << "Move assign\n";

        swap(*this, name); // Now calling our swap, not std::swap

        return *this;
    }
```

# Deleting the move constructor and move assignment

You can delete the move constructor and move assignment using the `= delete` syntax in the exact same way you can delete the copy constructor and copy assignment.

If you delete the copy constructor, the compiler will not generate an implicit move constructor (making your objects neither copyable nor movable). Therefore, when deleting the copy constructor, it is useful to be explicit about what behavior you want from your move constructors. Either explicitly delete them (making it clear this is the desired behavior), or default them (making the class move-only).

While deleting only the move constructor and move assignment may seem like a good idea if you want a copyable but not movable object, this has the unfortunate consequence of making the class not returnable by value in cases where mandatory copy elision does not apply. This happens because a deleted move constructor is still declared, and thus is eligible for overload resolution. And return by value will favor a deleted move constructor over a non-deleted copy constructor.