# std::move

In C++11, std::move is a standard library function that casts (using static_cast) its argument into an r-value reference, so that move semantics can be invoked. Thus, we can use std::move to cast an l-value into a type that will prefer being moved over being copied. std::move is defined in the utility header.

# Example

In the following program, we first add an element to a vector using copy semantics. Then we add an element to the vector using move semantics.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <utility> // for std::move
#include <vector>

int main()
{
	std::vector<std::string> v;

	// We use std::string because it is movable (std::string_view is not)
	std::string str { "Knock" };

	std::cout << "Copying str\n";
	v.push_back(str); // calls l-value version of push_back, which copies str into the array element

	std::cout << "str: " << str << '\n';
	std::cout << "vector: " << v[0] << '\n';

	std::cout << "\nMoving str\n";

	v.push_back(std::move(str)); // calls r-value version of push_back, which moves str into the array element

	std::cout << "str: " << str << '\n'; // The result of this is indeterminate
	std::cout << "vector:" << v[0] << ' ' << v[1] << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

On the author’s machine, this program prints:

```Output
Copying str
str: Knock
vector: Knock

Moving str
str:
vector: Knock Knock
```

# Moved from objects will be in a valid, but possibly indeterminate state

When we move the value from a temporary object, it doesn’t matter what value the moved-from object is left with, because the temporary object will be destroyed immediately anyway. But what about lvalue objects that we’ve used std::move() on? 

There are two schools of thought here. One school believes that objects that have been moved from should be reset back to some default / zero state, where the object does not own a resource any more. We see an example of this above, where `str` has been cleared to the empty string.

The other school believes that we should do whatever is most convenient, and not constrain ourselves to having to clear the moved-from object if its not convenient to do so.

About this, the C++ standard says, “Unless otherwise specified, moved-from objects \[of types defined in the C++ standard library] shall be placed in a valid but unspecified state.”

With a moved-from object, it is safe to call any function that does not depend on the current value of the object. This means we can set or reset the value of the moved-from object (using `operator=`, or any kind of `clear()` or `reset()` member function). We can also test the state of the moved-from object (e.g. using `empty()` to see if the object has a value). However, we should avoid functions like `operator[]` or `front()` (which returns the first element in a container), because these functions depend on the container having elements, and a moved-from container may or may not have elements.

# Where else is std::move useful?

std::move can also be useful when sorting an array of elements. Many sorting algorithms (such as selection sort and bubble sort) work by swapping pairs of elements. In previous lessons, we’ve had to resort to copy-semantics to do the swapping. Now we can use move semantics, which is more efficient.

