C++11 standard library ships with 4 smart pointer classes: std::auto_ptr (removed in C++17), std::unique_ptr, std::shared_ptr, and std::weak_ptr.

# std::unique_ptr

std::unique_ptr is the C++11 replacement for std::auto_ptr. It should be used to manage any dynamically allocated object that is not shared by multiple objects. That is, std::unique_ptr should completely own the object it manages, not share that ownership with other classes. std::unique_ptr lives in the \<memory> header.

Let’s take a look at a simple smart pointer example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory> // for std::unique_ptr

class Resource
{
public:
	Resource() { std::cout << "Resource acquired\n"; }
	~Resource() { std::cout << "Resource destroyed\n"; }
};

int main()
{
	// allocate a Resource object and have it owned by std::unique_ptr
	std::unique_ptr<Resource> res{ new Resource() };

	return 0;
} // res goes out of scope here, and the allocated Resource is destroyed
```

Unlike std::auto_ptr, std::unique_ptr properly implements move semantics.

```cpp
// res2 = res1; // Won't compile: copy assignment is disabled
	res2 = std::move(res1); // res2 assumes ownership, res1 is set to null
```

Because std::unique_ptr is designed with move semantics in mind, copy initialization and copy assignment are disabled. If you want to transfer the contents managed by std::unique_ptr, you must use move semantics.

# Accessing the managed object

std::unique_ptr has an overloaded operator* and operator-> that can be used to return the resource being managed. Operator* returns a reference to the managed resource, and operator-> returns a pointer.

Remember that std::unique_ptr may not always be managing an object -- either because it was created empty (using the default constructor or passing in a nullptr as the parameter), or because the resource it was managing got moved to another std::unique_ptr. So before we use either of these operators, we should check whether the std::unique_ptr actually has a resource. Fortunately, this is easy: std::unique_ptr has a cast to bool that returns true if the std::unique_ptr is managing a resource.

```cpp
if (res) // use implicit cast to bool to ensure res contains a Resource
		std::cout << *res << '\n'; // print the Resource that res is owning
```

#  std::unique_ptr and arrays

Unlike std::auto_ptr, std::unique_ptr is smart enough to know whether to use scalar delete or array delete, so std::unique_ptr is okay to use with both scalar objects and arrays.

However, std::array or std::vector (or std::string) are almost always better choices than using std::unique_ptr with a fixed array, dynamic array, or C-style string.

# std::make_unique

C++14 comes with an additional function named std::make_unique(). This templated function constructs an object of the template type and initializes it with the arguments passed into the function.

```cpp
// Create a single dynamically allocated Fraction with numerator 3 and denominator 5
	// We can also use automatic type deduction to good effect here
	auto f1{ std::make_unique<Fraction>(3, 5) };
	std::cout << *f1 << '\n';

	// Create a dynamically allocated array of Fractions of length 4
	auto f2{ std::make_unique<Fraction[]>(4) };
	std::cout << f2[0] << '\n';
```

```Output
3/5
0/1
```

Use of std::make_unique() is optional, but is recommended over creating std::unique_ptr yourself. This is because code using std::make_unique is simpler, and it also requires less typing (when used with automatic type deduction). Furthermore, in C++14 it resolves an exception safety issue that can result from C++ leaving the order of evaluation for function arguments unspecified.

[[C++/EXTRA#The exception safety issue in more detail]]

# Returning std::unique_ptr from a function

std::unique_ptr can be safely returned from a function by value:

```cpp
#include <memory> // for std::unique_ptr

std::unique_ptr<Resource> createResource()
{
     return std::make_unique<Resource>();
}

int main()
{
    auto ptr{ createResource() };

    // do whatever

    return 0;
}
```

# Passing std::unique_ptr to a function

If you want the function to take ownership of the contents of the pointer, pass the std::unique_ptr by value. Note that because copy semantics have been disabled, you’ll need to use std::move to actually pass the variable in.

```cpp
// This function takes ownership of the Resource, which isn't what we want
void takeOwnership(std::unique_ptr<Resource> res)
{
     if (res)
          std::cout << *res << '\n';
} // the Resource is destroyed here

int main()
{
    auto ptr{ std::make_unique<Resource>() };

//    takeOwnership(ptr); // This doesn't work, need to use move semantics
    takeOwnership(std::move(ptr)); // ok: use move semantics

    std::cout << "Ending program\n";

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
Resource acquired
I am a resource
Resource destroyed
Ending program
```

Note that in this case, ownership of the Resource was transferred to takeOwnership(), so the Resource was destroyed at the end of takeOwnership() rather than the end of main().

However, most of the time, you won’t want the function to take ownership of the resource. Although you can pass a std::unique_ptr by reference (which will allow the function to use the object without assuming ownership), you should only do so when the called function might alter or change the object being managed.

Instead, it’s better to just pass the resource itself (by pointer or reference, depending on whether null is a valid argument). This allows the function to remain agnostic of how the caller is managing its resources.

To get a raw resource pointer from a std::unique_ptr, you can use the get() member function:

```cpp
// The function only uses the resource, so we'll accept a pointer to the resource, not a reference to the whole std::unique_ptr<Resource>
void useResource(const Resource* res)
{
	if (res)
		std::cout << *res << '\n';
	else
		std::cout << "No resource\n";
}

int main()
{
	auto ptr{ std::make_unique<Resource>() };

	useResource(ptr.get()); // note: get() used here to get a pointer to the Resource

	std::cout << "Ending program\n";

	return 0;
} // The Resource is destroyed here
```

```Output
Resource acquired
I am a resource
Ending program
Resource destroyed
```

# std::unique_ptr and classes

You can, of course, use std::unique_ptr as a composition member of your class. This way, you don’t have to worry about ensuring your class destructor deletes the dynamic memory, as the std::unique_ptr will be automatically destroyed when the class object is destroyed.

However, if the class object is not destroyed properly (e.g. it is dynamically allocated and not deallocated properly), then the std::unique_ptr member will not be destroyed either, and the object being managed by the std::unique_ptr will not be deallocated.

# Misusing std::unique_ptr

There are two easy ways to misuse std::unique_ptrs, both of which are easily avoided. 
First, don’t let multiple objects manage the same resource. For example:

```cpp
Resource* res{ new Resource() };
std::unique_ptr<Resource> res1{ res };
std::unique_ptr<Resource> res2{ res };
```

While this is legal syntactically, the end result will be that both res1 and res2 will try to delete the Resource, which will lead to undefined behavior.

Second, don’t manually delete the resource out from underneath the std::unique_ptr.

```cpp
Resource* res{ new Resource() };
std::unique_ptr<Resource> res1{ res };
delete res;
```

If you do, the std::unique_ptr will try to delete an already deleted resource, again leading to undefined behavior.