Consider the following case, where the shared pointers in two separate objects each point at the other object:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory> // for std::shared_ptr
#include <string>

class Person
{
	std::string m_name;
	std::shared_ptr<Person> m_partner; // initially created empty

public:

	Person(const std::string &name): m_name(name)
	{
		std::cout << m_name << " created\n";
	}
	~Person()
	{
		std::cout << m_name << " destroyed\n";
	}

	friend bool partnerUp(std::shared_ptr<Person> &p1, std::shared_ptr<Person> &p2)
	{
		if (!p1 || !p2)
			return false;

		p1->m_partner = p2;
		p2->m_partner = p1;

		std::cout << p1->m_name << " is now partnered with " << p2->m_name << '\n';

		return true;
	}
};

int main()
{
	auto lucy { std::make_shared<Person>("Lucy") }; // create a Person named "Lucy"
	auto ricky { std::make_shared<Person>("Ricky") }; // create a Person named "Ricky"

	partnerUp(lucy, ricky); // Make "Lucy" point to "Ricky" and vice-versa

	return 0;
}
```

This program doesn’t execute as expected:

```Output
Lucy created
Ricky created
Lucy is now partnered with Ricky
```

At the end of main(), the ricky shared pointer goes out of scope first. When that happens, ricky checks if there are any other shared pointers that co-own the Person “Ricky”. There are (Lucy’s m_partner). Because of this, it doesn’t deallocate “Ricky” (if it did, then Lucy’s m_partner would end up as a dangling pointer). At this point, we now have one shared pointer to “Ricky” (Lucy’s m_partner) and two shared pointers to “Lucy” (lucy, and Ricky’s m_partner).

Next the lucy shared pointer goes out of scope, and the same thing happens. The shared pointer lucy checks if there are any other shared pointers co-owning the Person “Lucy”. There are (Ricky’s m_partner), so “Lucy” isn’t deallocated. At this point, there is one shared pointer to “Lucy” (Ricky’s m_partner) and one shared pointer to “Ricky” (Lucy’s m_partner).

Then the program ends -- and neither Person “Lucy” or “Ricky” have been deallocated! Essentially, “Lucy” ends up keeping “Ricky” from being destroyed, and “Ricky” ends up keeping “Lucy” from being destroyed.

# Circular references

A **Circular reference** (also called a **cyclical reference** or a **cycle**) is a series of references where each object references the next, and the last object references back to the first, causing a referential loop. The references do not need to be actual C++ references -- they can be pointers, unique IDs, or any other means of identifying specific objects.

The practical effect of having shared pointers form a cycle is that each object ends up keeping the next object alive -- with the last object keeping the first object alive. Thus, no objects in the series can be deallocated because they all think some other object still needs it!

# A reductive case

It turns out, this cyclical reference issue can even happen with a single std::shared_ptr -- a std::shared_ptr referencing the object that contains it is still a cycle (just a reductive one).

Although it’s fairly unlikely that this would ever happen in practice, we’ll show you for additional comprehension:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory> // for std::shared_ptr

class Resource
{
public:
	std::shared_ptr<Resource> m_ptr {}; // initially created empty

	Resource() { std::cout << "Resource acquired\n"; }
	~Resource() { std::cout << "Resource destroyed\n"; }
};

int main()
{
	auto ptr1 { std::make_shared<Resource>() };

	ptr1->m_ptr = ptr1; // m_ptr is now sharing the Resource that contains it

	return 0;
}
```

In the above example, when ptr1 goes out of scope, the Resource is not deallocated because the Resource’s m_ptr is sharing the Resource. At that point, the only way for the Resource to be released would be to set m_ptr to something else (so nothing is sharing the Resource any longer). But we can’t access m_ptr because ptr1 is out of scope, so we no longer have a way to do this. The Resource has become a memory leak.

Thus, the program prints:

```Output
Resource acquired
```

# So what is std::weak_ptr for anyway?

std::weak_ptr was designed to solve the “cyclical ownership” problem described above. A std::weak_ptr is an observer -- it can observe and access the same object as a std::shared_ptr (or other std::weak_ptrs) but it is not considered an owner.
Remember, when a std::shared pointer goes out of scope, it only considers whether other std::shared_ptr are co-owning the object. std::weak_ptr does not count!

Let’s solve our Person-al issue using a std::weak_ptr:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory> // for std::shared_ptr and std::weak_ptr
#include <string>

class Person
{
	std::string m_name;
	std::weak_ptr<Person> m_partner; // note: This is now a std::weak_ptr

public:

	Person(const std::string &name): m_name(name)
	{
		std::cout << m_name << " created\n";
	}
	~Person()
	{
		std::cout << m_name << " destroyed\n";
	}

	friend bool partnerUp(std::shared_ptr<Person> &p1, std::shared_ptr<Person> &p2)
	{
		if (!p1 || !p2)
			return false;

		p1->m_partner = p2;
		p2->m_partner = p1;

		std::cout << p1->m_name << " is now partnered with " << p2->m_name << '\n';

		return true;
	}
};

int main()
{
	auto lucy { std::make_shared<Person>("Lucy") };
	auto ricky { std::make_shared<Person>("Ricky") };

	partnerUp(lucy, ricky);

	return 0;
}
```

```Output
Lucy created
Ricky created
Lucy is now partnered with Ricky
Ricky destroyed
Lucy destroyed
```

# Using std::weak_ptr

One downside of std::weak_ptr is that std::weak_ptr are not directly usable (they have no operator->). To use a std::weak_ptr, you must first convert it into a std::shared_ptr. Then you can use the std::shared_ptr. To convert a std::weak_ptr into a std::shared_ptr, you can use the lock() member function. Here’s the above example, updated to show this off:

```cpp
const std::shared_ptr<Person> getPartner() const { return m_partner.lock(); } // use lock() to convert weak_ptr to shared_ptr
	const std::string& getName() const { return m_name; }
```

```cpp
int main()
{
	auto lucy { std::make_shared<Person>("Lucy") };
	auto ricky { std::make_shared<Person>("Ricky") };

	partnerUp(lucy, ricky);

	auto partner = ricky->getPartner(); // get shared_ptr to Ricky's partner
	std::cout << ricky->getName() << "'s partner is: " << partner->getName() << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

```Output
Lucy created
Ricky created
Lucy is now partnered with Ricky
Ricky's partner is: Lucy
Ricky destroyed
Lucy destroyed
```

# Avoiding dangling pointers with std::weak_ptr

Because std::weak_ptr won’t keep an owned resource alive, it’s similarly possible for a std::weak_ptr to be left pointing to a resource that has been deallocated by a std::shared_ptr. However, std::weak_ptr has a neat trick up its sleeve -- because it has access to the reference count for an object, it can determine if it is pointing to a valid object or not! If the reference count is non-zero, the resource is still valid. If the reference count is zero, then the resource has been destroyed.

The easiest way to test whether a std::weak_ptr is valid is to use the `expired()` member function, which returns `true` if the std::weak_ptr is pointing to an invalid object, and `false` otherwise.

Note that if a std::weak_ptr is expired, then we shouldn’t call `lock()` on it, because the object being pointed to has already been destroyed, so there is no object to share. If you do call `lock()` on an expired std::weak_ptr, it will return a std::shared_ptr to `nullptr`.

# Conclusion

std::shared_ptr can be used when you need multiple smart pointers that can co-own a resource. The resource will be deallocated when the last std::shared_ptr goes out of scope. std::weak_ptr can be used when you want a smart pointer that can see and use a shared resource, but does not participate in the ownership of that resource.