# Bits, bytes, and memory addressing

The smallest unit of memory is a **binary digit** (also called a **bit**), which can hold a value of 0 or 1.
Memory is organized into sequential units called **memory addresses** (or **addresses** for short).
Each memory address holds 1 byte of data. A **byte** is a group of bits that are operated on as a unit. The modern standard is that a byte is comprised of 8 sequential bits.

## Data type

Because all data on a computer is just a sequence of bits, we use a **data type** (often called a “type” for short) to tell the compiler how to interpret the contents of memory in some meaningful way.

When you give an object a value, the compiler and CPU take care of encoding your value into the appropriate sequence of bits for that data type, which are then stored in memory (remember: memory can only store bits).

# Fundamental data types

C++ comes with built-in support for many different data types. These are called **fundamental data types**, but are often informally called **basic types**, **primitive types**, or **built-in types**.

|Types |Category|Meaning|Example|
|---|---|---|---|
|float  <br>double  <br>long double|Floating Point|a number with a fractional part|3.14159|
|bool|Integral (Boolean)|true or false|true|
|char  <br>wchar_t  <br>char8_t (C++20)  <br>char16_t (C++11)  <br>char32_t (C++11)|Integral (Character)|a single character of text|‘c’|
|short int  <br>int  <br>long int  <br>long long int (C++11)|Integral (Integer)|positive and negative whole numbers, including 0|64|
|std::nullptr_t (C++11)|Null Pointer|a null pointer|nullptr|
|void|Void|no type|n/a|

C++ also supports a number of other more complex types, called _compound types_.

# The _t suffix

Many of the types defined in newer versions of C++ (e.g. std::nullptr_t) use a _t suffix. This suffix means “type”, and it’s a common nomenclature applied to modern types.

If you see something with a _t suffix, it’s probably a type. But many types don’t have a _t suffix, so this isn’t consistently applied.