The **char** data type was designed to hold a single `character`. A **character** can be a single letter, number, symbol, or whitespace.

The char data type is an integral type, meaning the underlying value is stored as an integer. Similar to how a Boolean value `0` is interpreted as `false` and non-zero is interpreted as `true`, the integer stored by a `char` variable are intepreted as an [[C++/EXTRA]] character.

# Initializing chars

You can initialize char variables using character literals:

```cpp
char ch2{ 'a' }; // initialize with code point for 'a' (stored as integer 97) (preferred)
```

You can initialize chars with integers as well, but this should be avoided if possible

```cpp
char ch1{ 97 }; // initialize with integer 97 ('a') (not preferred)
```

# Printing chars

When using std::cout to print a char, std::cout outputs the char variable as an ASCII character:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    char ch1{ 'a' }; // (preferred)
    std::cout << ch1; // cout prints character 'a'

    char ch2{ 98 }; // code point for 'b' (not preferred)
    std::cout << ch2; // cout prints a character ('b')


    return 0;
}
```

```Output
ab
```

# Inputting Char

Note that std::cin will let you enter multiple characters. However, variable _ch_ can only hold 1 character. Consequently, only the first input character is extracted into variable _ch_. The rest of the user input is left in the input buffer that std::cin uses, and can be extracted with subsequent calls to std::cin.

You can see this behavior in the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Input a keyboard character: "; // assume the user enters "abcd" (without quotes)

    char ch{};
    std::cin >> ch; // ch = 'a', "bcd" is left queued.
    std::cout << "You entered: " << ch << '\n';

    // Note: The following cin doesn't ask the user for input, it grabs queued input!
    std::cin >> ch; // ch = 'b', "cd" is left queued.
    std::cout << "You entered: " << ch << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

Input a keyboard character: abcd

```Output
You entered: a
You entered: b
```

# Char size, range, and default sign

Char is defined by C++ to always be 1 byte in size. By default, a char may be signed or unsigned (though it’s usually signed). If you’re using chars to hold ASCII characters, you don’t need to specify a sign (since both signed and unsigned chars can hold values between 0 and 127).

If you’re using a char to hold small integers (something you should not do unless you’re explicitly optimizing for space), you should always specify whether it is signed or unsigned. A signed char can hold a number between -128 and 127. An unsigned char can hold a number between 0 and 255.

# Escape sequences

There are some characters in C++ that have special meaning. These characters are called **escape sequences**. An escape sequence starts with a ‘\’ (backslash) character, and then a following letter or number.

`'\n'`, which can be used to print a newline
`'\t'`, which embeds a horizontal tab
\\’ prints a single quote  
\\” prints a double quote  
 \\\\prints a backslash

[[C++/EXTRA#Escape sequences|More escape sequence]]

# [[C++/EXTRA#What about the other char types, `wchar_t`, `char8_t`, `char16_t`, and `char32_t`?|What about the other char types, `wchar_t`, `char8_t`, `char16_t`, and `char32_t`?]]
