
When the compiler does type conversion on our behalf without us explicitly asking, we call this **implicit type conversion**

## Type conversion produces a new value

Even though it is called a conversion, a type conversion does not actually change the value or type of the value being converted. Instead, the value to be converted is used as input, and the conversion results in a new value of the target type (via direct initialization).

#Note Type conversion uses direct initialization to produce a new value of the target type from a value of a different type.

# Implicit type conversion warnings

Some type conversions are always safe to make (such as `int` to `double`), whereas others may result in the value being changed during conversion (such as `double` to `int`). Unsafe implicit conversions will typically either generate a compiler warning, or (in the case of brace initialization) an error.

This is one of the primary reasons brace initialization is the preferred initialization form. Brace initialization will ensure we don’t try to initialize a variable with an initializer that will lose value when it is implicitly type converted:

```cpp
int main()
{
    double d { 5 }; // okay: int to double is safe
    int x { 5.5 }; // error: double to int not safe

    return 0;
}
```

# An introduction to explicit type conversion via the static_cast operator

**Explicit type conversion** allow us (the programmer) to explicitly tell the compiler to convert a value from one type to another type, and that we take full responsibility for the result of that conversion. If such a conversion results in the loss of value, the compiler will not warn us.

To perform an explicit type conversion, in most cases we’ll use the `static_cast` operator.

#Syntax 
```cpp
static_cast<new_type>(expression)
```

static_cast takes the value from an expression as input, and returns that value converted into the type specified by _new_type_ (e.g. int, bool, char, double).

#Extra 
	Whenever you see C++ syntax (excluding the preprocessor) that makes use of angled brackets (<>), the thing between the angled brackets will most likely be a type. This is typically how C++ deals with code that need a parameterized type.

**The static_cast operator will produce undefined behavior if the value being converted doesn’t fit in range of the new type.**

