
An **integer** is an integral type that can represent positive and negative whole numbers, including 0 (e.g. -2, -1, 0, 1, 2). C++ has _4_ primary fundamental integer types available for use:

| Type | Minimum Size | Note |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| short int | 16 bits |  |
| int | 16 bits | Typically 32 bits on modern architectures |
| long int | 32 bits |  |
| long long int | 64 bits |  |

# Signed integers

This attribute of an integer being positive, negative, or zero is called the number’s **sign**.

By default, integers in C++ are **signed**, which means the number’s sign is stored as part of the number. Therefore, a signed integer can hold both positive and negative numbers (and 0).

#Note 
	In binary representation, a single bit (called the **sign bit**) is used to store the sign of the number. The non-sign bits (called the **magnitude bits**) determine the magnitude of the number.

# Defining signed integers

Here is the preferred way to define the four types of signed integers:

```cpp
short s;      // prefer "short" instead of "short int"
int i;
long l;       // prefer "long" instead of "long int"
long long ll; // prefer "long long" instead of "long long int"
```

Although _short int_, _long int_, or _long long int_ will work, we prefer the short names for these types (that do not use the _int_ suffix). In addition to being more typing, adding the _int_ suffix makes the type harder to distinguish from variables of type _int_. This can lead to mistakes if the short or long modifier is inadvertently missed.

The integer types can also take an optional _signed_ keyword, which by convention is typically placed before the type name:

```cpp
signed short ss;
signed int si;
signed long sl;
signed long long sll;
```

However, this keyword should not be used, as it is redundant, since integers are signed by default.

# Signed integer ranges

Here’s a table containing the range of signed integers of different sizes:

|Size/Type|Range|
|---|---|
|8 bit signed|-128 to 127|
|16 bit signed|-32,768 to 32,767|
|32 bit signed|-2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647|
|64 bit signed|-9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807|

An n-bit signed variable has a range of -(2^(n-1)) to 2^(n-1)-1.

# Overflow

The C++20 standard makes this blanket statement: “If during the evaluation of an expression, the result is not mathematically defined or not in the range of representable values for its type, the behavior is undefined”. Colloquially, this is called **overflow**.

If an arithmetic operation (such as addition or multiplication) attempts to create a value outside the range that can be represented, this is called **integer overflow** (or **arithmetic overflow**)

# Integer division

When dividing two integers, C++ works like you’d expect when the quotient is a whole number:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << 20 / 4 << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

```Output
5
```

But let’s look at what happens when integer division causes a fractional result:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << 8 / 5 << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

This produces a possibly unexpected result:

```Output
1
```

When doing division with two integers (called **integer division**), C++ always produces an integer result. Since integers can’t hold fractional values, any fractional portion is simply dropped (not rounded!).

Taking a closer look at the above example, 8 / 5 produces the value 1.6. The fractional part (0.6) is dropped, and the result of 1 remains. Alternatively, we can say 8 / 5 equals 1 remainder 3. The remainder is dropped, leaving 1.

Similarly, -8 / 5 results in the value -1.