**Unsigned integers** are integers that can only hold non-negative whole numbers.

# Defining unsigned integers

To define an unsigned integer, we use the _unsigned_ keyword. By convention, this is placed before the type:

```cpp
unsigned short us;
unsigned int ui;
unsigned long ul;
unsigned long long ull;
```

# Unsigned integer range

A 1-byte unsigned integer has a range of 0 to 255. Compare this to the 1-byte signed integer range of -128 to 127. Both can store 256 different values, but signed integers use half of their range for negative numbers, whereas unsigned integers can store positive numbers that are twice as large.

|Size/Type|Range|
|---|---|
|8 bit unsigned|0 to 255|
|16 bit unsigned|0 to 65,535|
|32 bit unsigned|0 to 4,294,967,295|
|64 bit unsigned|0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615|

An n-bit unsigned variable has a range of 0 to (2^n)-1.

# Unsigned integer overflow

If an unsigned value is out of range, it is divided by one greater than the largest number of the type, and only the remainder kept.

The number `280` is too big to fit in our 1-byte range of 0 to 255. 1 greater than the largest number of the type is 256. Therefore, we divide 280 by 256, getting 1 remainder 24. The remainder of 24 is what is stored.

Here’s another way to think about the same thing. Any number bigger than the largest number representable by the type simply “wraps around” (sometimes called “modulo wrapping”). `255` is in range of a 1-byte integer, so `255` is fine. `256`, however, is outside the range, so it wraps around to the value `0`. `257` wraps around to the value `1`. `280` wraps around to the value `24`.

It’s possible to wrap around the other direction as well.

# The controversy over unsigned numbers

Unexpected behavior can result when you mix signed and unsigned integers. In C++, if a mathematical operation (e.g. arithmetic or comparison) has one signed integer and one unsigned integer, the signed integer will usually be converted to an unsigned integer. And the result will thus be unsigned.