
# Fixed-width integers

C99 defined a set of **fixed-width integers** (in the stdint.h header) that are guaranteed to be the same size on any architecture.

These are defined as follows:

| Name | Type | Range | Notes |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| std::int8_t | 1 byte signed | -128 to 127 | Treated like a signed char on many systems. See note below. |
| std::uint8_t | 1 byte unsigned | 0 to 255 | Treated like an unsigned char on many systems. See note below. |
| std::int16_t | 2 byte signed | -32,768 to 32,767 |  |
| std::uint16_t | 2 byte unsigned | 0 to 65,535 |  |
| std::int32_t | 4 byte signed | -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 |  |
| std::uint32_t | 4 byte unsigned | 0 to 4,294,967,295 |  |
| std::int64_t | 8 byte signed | -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807 |  |
| std::uint64_t | 8 byte unsigned | 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 |  |

C++ officially adopted these fixed-width integers as part of C++11. They can be accessed by including the `<cstdint>` header, where they are defined inside the _std_ namespace.


**The fixed-width integers have two downsides that are typically raised.**

- First, the fixed-width integers are not guaranteed to be defined on all architectures. They only exist on systems where there are fundamental types matching their widths and following a certain binary representation. Your program will fail to compile on any such architecture that does not support a fixed-width integer that your program is using. However, given that most modern architectures have standardized around 8/16/32/64-bit variables, this is unlikely to be a problem unless your program needs to be portable to some exotic mainframe or embedded architectures.

- Second, if you use a fixed-width integer, it may be slower than a wider type on some architectures. For example, if you need an integer that is guaranteed to be 32-bits, you might decide to use `std::int32_t`, but your CPU might actually be faster at processing 64-bit integers. However, just because your CPU can process a given type faster doesn’t mean your program will be faster overall -- modern programs are often constrained by memory usage rather than CPU, and the larger memory footprint may slow your program more than the faster CPU processing accelerates it. It’s hard to know without actually measuring.

## Fast and least integers

To help address the above downsides, C++ also defines two alternative sets of integers that are guaranteed to be defined.

The fast types (std::int_fast#_t and std::uint_fast#_t) provide the fastest signed/unsigned integer type with a width of at least # bits (where # = 8, 16, 32, or 64). For example, _std::int_fast32_t_ will give you the fastest signed integer type that’s at least 32 bits. By fastest, we mean the integral type that can be processed most quickly by the CPU.

The least types (std::int_least#_t and std::uint_least#_t) provide the smallest signed/unsigned integer type with a width of at least # bits (where # = 8, 16, 32, or 64). For example, _std::uint_least32_t_ will give you the smallest unsigned integer type that’s at least 32 bits.

Here’s an example from the author’s Visual Studio (32-bit console application):

```cpp
#include <cstdint> // for fast and least types
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	std::cout << "least 8:  " << sizeof(std::int_least8_t) * 8 << " bits\n";
	std::cout << "least 16: " << sizeof(std::int_least16_t) * 8 << " bits\n";
	std::cout << "least 32: " << sizeof(std::int_least32_t) * 8 << " bits\n";
	std::cout << '\n';
	std::cout << "fast 8:  " << sizeof(std::int_fast8_t) * 8 << " bits\n";
	std::cout << "fast 16: " << sizeof(std::int_fast16_t) * 8 << " bits\n";
	std::cout << "fast 32: " << sizeof(std::int_fast32_t) * 8 << " bits\n";

	return 0;
}
```

```Output
least 8:  8 bits
least 16: 16 bits
least 32: 32 bits

fast 8:  8 bits
fast 16: 32 bits
fast 32: 32 bits
```

However, these fast and least integers have their own downsides: 
- First, not many programmers actually use them, and a lack of familiarity can lead to errors. 
- Second, the fast types can lead to memory wastage, as their actual size may be larger than indicated by their name. 
- More seriously, because the size of the fast/least integers can vary, it’s possible that your program may exhibit different behaviors on architectures where they resolve to different sizes.

## std::int8_t and std::uint8_t likely behave like chars instead of integers

Most compilers define and treat _std::int8_t_ and _std::uint8_t_ (and the corresponding fast and least fixed-width types) identically to types _signed char_ and _unsigned char_ respectively. This means these 8-bit types may (or may not) behave differently than the rest of the fixed-width types, which can lead to errors. This behavior is system-dependent, so a program that behaves correctly on one architecture may not compile or behave correctly on another architecture.

When storing integral values where a specific size is important, it’s generally best to avoid _std::int8_t_ and _std::uint8_t_ (and the related fast and least types) and use _std::int16_t_ or _std::uint16_t_ instead.

[[C++/EXTRA#std int8_t and std uint8_t likely behave like chars instead of integers|How to solve this]]

## Best practice

- Prefer `int` when the size of the integer doesn’t matter (e.g. the number will always fit within the range of a 2-byte signed integer) and the variable is short-lived (e.g. destroyed at the end of the function). For example, if you’re asking the user to enter their age, or counting from 1 to 10, it doesn’t matter whether int is 16 or 32 bits (the numbers will fit either way). This will cover the vast majority of the cases you’re likely to run across.
- Prefer `std::int#_t` when storing a quantity that needs a guaranteed range.
- Prefer `std::uint#_t` when doing bit manipulation or where well-defined wrap-around behavior is required.

Avoid the following when possible:

- `short` and `long` integers -- use a fixed-width type instead.
- Unsigned types for holding quantities.
- The 8-bit fixed-width integer types.
- The fast and least fixed-width types.
- Any compiler-specific fixed-width integers -- for example, Visual Studio defines __int8, __int16, etc…
