A **floating point** type variable is a variable that can hold a number with a fractional component, such as 4320.0, -3.33, or 0.01226. The _floating_ part of the name _floating point_ refers to the fact that the decimal point can “float” -- that is, it can support a variable number of digits before and after the decimal point.

There are three different floating point data types: **float**, **double**, and **long double**.
A float is 4 bytes, a double is 8 bytes, and a long double can be equivalent to a double (8 bytes), 80-bits (often padded to 12 bytes), or 16 bytes.

Floating point data types are always signed (can hold positive and negative values).

| Category       | Type        | Minimum Size | Typical Size       |
| -------------- | ----------- | ------------ | ------------------ |
| floating point | float       | 4 bytes      | 4 bytes            |
|                | double      | 8 bytes      | 8 bytes            |
|                | long double | 8 bytes      | 8, 12, or 16 bytes |

Here are some definitions of floating point variables:

```cpp
float fValue;
double dValue;
long double ldValue;
```

When using floating point literals, always include at least one decimal place (even if the decimal is 0). This helps the compiler understand that the number is a floating point number and not an integer.

```cpp
int x{5};      // 5 means integer
double y{5.0}; // 5.0 is a floating point literal (no suffix means double type by default)
float z{5.0f}; // 5.0 is a floating point literal, f suffix means float type
```

Note that by default, floating point literals default to type double. An f suffix is used to denote a literal of type float.

# Printing floating point numbers

Now consider this simple program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	std::cout << 5.0 << '\n';
	std::cout << 6.7f << '\n';
	std::cout << 9876543.21 << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

The results of this seemingly simple program may surprise you:

```Output
5
6.7
9.87654e+06
```

In the first case, the std::cout printed 5, even though we typed in 5.0. By default, std::cout will not print the fractional part of a number if the fractional part is 0.

In the second case, the number prints as we expect.

In the third case, it printed the number in scientific notation

# Floating point range

Assuming IEEE 754 representation:

|Size|Range|Precision|
|---|---|---|
|4 bytes|±1.18 x 10-38 to ±3.4 x 1038 and 0.0|6-9 significant digits, typically 7|
|8 bytes|±2.23 x 10-308 to ±1.80 x 10308 and 0.0|15-18 significant digits, typically 16|
|80-bits (typically uses 12 or 16 bytes)|±3.36 x 10-4932 to ±1.18 x 104932 and 0.0|18-21 significant digits|
|16 bytes|±3.36 x 10-4932 to ±1.18 x 104932 and 0.0|33-36 significant digits|

The 80-bit floating point type is a bit of a historical anomaly. On modern processors, it is typically implemented using 12 or 16 bytes (which is a more natural size for processors to handle).

It may seem a little odd that the 80-bit floating point type has the same range as the 16-byte floating point type. This is because they have the same number of bits dedicated to the exponent -- however, the 16-byte number can store more significant digits.

# Floating point precision 

The **precision** of a floating point type defines how many significant digits it can represent without information loss.

The number of digits of precision a floating point type has depends on both the size (floats have less precision than doubles) and the particular value being stored (some values can be represented more precisely than others).

For example, a `float` has 6 to 9 digits of precision. This means that a float can exactly represent any number with up to 6 significant digits. A number with 7 to 9 significant digits may or may not be represented exactly depending on the specific value. And a number with more than 9 digits of precision will definitely not be represented exactly.

Double values have between 15 and 18 digits of precision, with most double values having at least 16 significant digits. Long double has a minimum precision of 15, 18, or 33 significant digits depending on how many bytes it occupies.

# Outputting floating point values

When outputting floating point numbers, std::cout has a default precision of 6 -- that is, it assumes all floating point variables are only significant to 6 digits (the minimum precision of a float), and hence it will truncate anything after that.

The following program shows std::cout truncating to 6 digits:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << 9.87654321f << '\n';
    std::cout << 987.654321f << '\n';
    std::cout << 987654.321f << '\n';
    std::cout << 9876543.21f << '\n';
    std::cout << 0.0000987654321f << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
9.87654
987.654
987654
9.87654e+006
9.87654e-005
```

Note that each of these only have 6 significant digits.

[[C++/EXTRA#Output manipulators|Output manipulation]]

# Rounding Error

When precision is lost because a number can’t be stored precisely, this is called a **rounding error**.

[[C++/EXTRA#Rounding errors make floating point comparisons tricky|Rounding errors make floating point comparisons tricky]]

# NaN and Inf

There are two special categories of floating point numbers. The first is **Inf**, which represents infinity. Inf can be positive or negative. The second is **NaN**, which stands for “Not a Number”. There are several different kinds of NaN (which we won’t discuss here). NaN and Inf are only available if the compiler uses a specific format (IEEE 754) for floating point numbers. If another format is used, the following code produces undefined behavior.

Here’s a program showing all three:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    double zero {0.0};
    double posinf { 5.0 / zero }; // positive infinity
    std::cout << posinf << '\n';

    double neginf { -5.0 / zero }; // negative infinity
    std::cout << neginf << '\n';

    double nan { zero / zero }; // not a number (mathematically invalid)
    std::cout << nan << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

And the results using Visual Studio 2008 on Windows:

```Output
1.#INF
-1.#INF
1.#IND
```

_INF_ stands for infinity, and _IND_ stands for indeterminate. Note that the results of printing _Inf_ and _NaN_ are platform specific, so your results may vary.

# Conclusion

To summarize, the two things you should remember about floating point numbers:

1. Floating point numbers are useful for storing very large or very small numbers, including those with fractional components.
2. Floating point numbers often have small rounding errors, even when the number has fewer significant digits than the precision. Many times these go unnoticed because they are so small, and because the numbers are truncated for output. However, comparisons of floating point numbers may not give the expected results. Performing mathematical operations on these values will cause the rounding errors to grow larger.