# Local variables have block scope

Local variables have **block scope**, which means they are _in scope_ from their point of definition to the end of the block they are defined within.

## All variable names within a scope must be unique

 Variable names must be unique within a given scope, otherwise any reference to the name will be ambiguous.
## Local variables have automatic storage duration 

A variable’s **storage duration** (usually just called **duration**) determines what rules govern when and how a variable will be created and destroyed. In most cases, a variable’s storage duration directly determines its `lifetime`.

Local variables have **automatic storage duration**, which means they are created at the point of definition and destroyed at the end of the block they are defined in.

For this reason, local variables are sometimes called **automatic variables**.

## Local variables in nested blocks

Local variables can be defined inside nested blocks. This works identically to local variables in function body blocks.

## Local variables have no linkage

Identifiers have another property named `linkage`. An identifier’s **linkage** determines whether other declarations of that name refer to the same object or not.

Local variables have `no linkage`, which means that each declaration refers to a unique object. For example:

```cpp
int main()
{
    int x { 2 }; // local variable, no linkage

    {
        int x { 3 }; // this identifier x refers to a different object than the previous x
    }

    return 0;
}
```

Scope and linkage may seem somewhat similar. However, scope defines where a single declaration can be seen and used. Linkage defines whether multiple declarations refer to the same object or not.

## Variables should be defined in the most limited scope

By limiting the scope of a variable, you reduce the complexity of the program because the number of active variables is reduced. Further, it makes it easier to see where variables are used (or aren’t used). A variable defined inside a block can only be used within that block (or nested blocks). This can make the program easier to understand.