In C++, variables can also be declared _outside_ of a function. Such variables are called **global variables**.

# Declaring global variables

By convention, global variables are declared at the top of a file, below the includes, in the global namespace.

# The scope of global variables

Identifiers declared in the global namespace have **global namespace scope** (commonly called **global scope**, and sometimes informally called **file scope**), which means they are visible from the point of declaration until the end of the _file_ in which they are declared.

Global variables can also be defined inside a user-defined namespace. Here is the same example as above, but `g_x` has been moved from the global scope into user-defined namespace `Foo`:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

namespace Foo // Foo is defined in the global scope
{
    int g_x {}; // g_x is now inside the Foo namespace, but is still a global variable
}

void doSomething()
{
    // global variables can be seen and used everywhere in the file
    Foo::g_x = 3;
    std::cout << Foo::g_x << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    doSomething();
    std::cout << Foo::g_x << '\n';

    // global variables can be seen and used everywhere in the file
    Foo::g_x = 5;
    std::cout << Foo::g_x << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

# Global variables have static duration

Global variables are created when the program starts (before `main()` begins execution), and destroyed when it ends. This is called **static duration**. Variables with _static duration_ are sometimes called **static variables**.

# Naming global variables

By convention, some developers prefix non-const global variable identifiers with “g” or “g_” to indicate that they are global. This prefix serves several purposes:

- It helps avoid naming collisions with other identifiers in the global namespace.
- It helps prevent inadvertent [[5. Variable shadowing (name hiding)|name shadowing]].
- It helps indicate that the prefixed variables persist beyond the scope of the function, and thus any changes we make to them will also persist.

# Global variable initialization

Unlike local variables, which are uninitialized by default, variables with static duration are zero-initialized by default.

Non-constant global variables can be optionally initialized:

```cpp
int g_x;       // no explicit initializer (zero-initialized by default)
int g_y {};    // value initialized (resulting in zero-initialization)
int g_z { 1 }; // list initialized with specific value
```

# Constant global variables

Just like local variables, global variables can be constant. As with all constants, constant global variables must be initialized.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

const int g_x;     // error: constant variables must be initialized
constexpr int g_w; // error: constexpr variables must be initialized

const int g_y { 1 };     // const global variable g_y, initialized with a value
constexpr int g_z { 2 }; // constexpr global variable g_z, initialized with a value
```

