“An identifier’s linkage determines whether other declarations of that name refer to the same object or not”, and we discussed how local variables have `no linkage`.

Global variable and functions identifiers can have either `internal linkage` or `external linkage`.

An identifier with **internal linkage** can be seen and used within a single translation unit, but it is not accessible from other translation units (that is, it is not exposed to the linker). This means that if two source files have identically named identifiers with internal linkage, those identifiers will be treated as independent (and do not result in an ODR violation for having duplicate definitions).

# Global variables with internal linkage

Global variables with internal linkage are sometimes called **internal variables**.

To make a non-constant global variable internal, we use the `static` keyword.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

static int g_x{}; // non-constant globals have external linkage by default, but can be given internal linkage via the static keyword
```

Const and constexpr global variables have internal linkage by default (and thus don’t need the `static` keyword -- if it is used, it will be ignored).

Here’s an example of multiple files using internal variables:

a.cpp:
```cpp
[[maybe_unused]] constexpr int g_x { 2 }; // this internal g_x is only accessible within a.cpp
```

main.cpp:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

static int g_x { 3 }; // this separate internal g_x is only accessible within main.cpp

int main()
{
    std::cout << g_x << '\n'; // uses main.cpp's g_x, prints 3

    return 0;
}
```

```Output
3
```

Because `g_x` is internal to each file, `main.cpp` has no idea that `a.cpp` also has a variable named `g_x` (and vice versa).

# Functions with internal linkage

Because linkage is a property of an identifier (not of a variable), function identifiers have the same linkage property that variable identifiers do. Functions default to external linkage, but can be set to internal linkage via the `static` keyword:

add.cpp:
```cpp
// This function is declared as static, and can now be used only within this file
// Attempts to access it from another file via a function forward declaration will fail
[[maybe_unused]] static int add(int x, int y)
{
    return x + y;
}
```

main.cpp:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

static int add(int x, int y); // forward declaration for function add

int main()
{
    std::cout << add(3, 4) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

This program won’t link, because function `add` is not accessible outside of `add.cpp`.

# `static` vs unnamed namespaces

In modern C++, use of the `static` keyword for giving identifiers internal linkage is falling out of favor. Unnamed namespaces can give internal linkage to a wider range of identifiers (e.g. type identifiers), and they are better suited for giving many identifiers internal linkage.

# Why bother giving identifiers internal linkage?

There are typically two reasons to give identifiers internal linkage:

- There is an identifier we want to make sure isn’t accessible to other files. This could be a global variable we don’t want messed with, or a helper function we don’t want called.
- To be pedantic about avoiding naming collisions. Because identifiers with internal linkage aren’t exposed to the linker, they can only collide with names in the same translation unit, not across the entire program.