An identifier with **external linkage** can be seen and used both from the file in which it is defined, and from other code files (via a forward declaration). In this sense, identifiers with external linkage are truly “global” in that they can be used anywhere in your program!An identifier with **external linkage** can be seen and used both from the file in which it is defined, and from other code files (via a forward declaration). In this sense, identifiers with external linkage are truly “global” in that they can be used anywhere in your program!

# Functions have external linkage by default

In order to call a function defined in another file, you must place a `forward declaration` for the function in any other files wishing to use the function. The forward declaration tells the compiler about the existence of the function, and the linker connects the function calls to the actual function definition.

# Global variables with external linkage

Global variables with external linkage are sometimes called **external variables**. To make a global variable external (and thus accessible by other files), we can use the `extern` keyword to do so:

```cpp
int g_x { 2 }; // non-constant globals are external by default

extern const int g_y { 3 }; // const globals can be defined as extern, making them external
extern constexpr int g_z { 3 }; // constexpr globals can be defined as extern, making them external (but this is pretty useless, see the warning in the next section)

int main()
{
    return 0;
}
```

# Variable forward declarations via the extern keyword

To actually use an external global variable that has been defined in another file, you also must place a `forward declaration` for the global variable in any other files wishing to use the variable. For variables, creating a forward declaration is also done via the `extern` keyword (with no initialization value).

Here is an example of using a variable forward declaration:

a.cpp:
```cpp
// global variable definitions
int g_x { 2 }; // non-constant globals have external linkage by default
extern const int g_y { 3 }; // this extern gives g_y external linkage
```

main.cpp:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

extern int g_x; // this extern is a forward declaration of a variable named g_x that is defined somewhere else
extern const int g_y; // this extern is a forward declaration of a const variable named g_y that is defined somewhere else

int main()
{
    std::cout << g_x << ' ' << g_y << '\n'; // prints 2 3

    return 0;
}
```

In the above example, `a.cpp` and `main.cpp` both reference the same global variable named `g_x`. So even though `g_x` is defined and initialized in `a.cpp`, we are able to use its value in `main.cpp` via the forward declaration of `g_x`.

Note that the `extern` keyword has different meanings in different contexts. In some contexts, `extern` means “give this variable external linkage”. In other contexts, `extern` means “this is a forward declaration for an external variable that is defined somewhere else”.

 #Warning
	 - Although constexpr variables can be given external linkage via the `extern` keyword, they can not be forward declared as constexpr. This is because the compiler needs to know the value of the constexpr variable (at compile time). If that value is defined in some other file, the compiler has no visibility on what value was defined in that other file. However, you can forward declare a constexpr variable as const, which the compiler will treat as a runtime const. This isn’t particularly useful.
	- If you want to define an uninitialized non-const global variable, do not use the extern keyword, otherwise C++ will think you’re trying to make a forward declaration for the variable.
