# Static local variables

Using the `static` keyword on a local variable changes its duration from `automatic duration` to `static duration`. This means the variable is now created at the start of the program, and destroyed at the end of the program (just like a global variable). As a result, the static variable will retain its value even after it goes out of scope!

Static local variables that have no initializer or a non-constexpr initializer are zero-initialized at program start. Static local variables with a non-constexpr initializer are reinitialized the first time the variable definition is encountered. The definition is skipped on subsequent calls, so no futher reinitialization happens. Because they have static duration, static local variables that are not explicitly initialized will be zero-initialized by default.

One of the most common uses for static duration local variables is for unique ID generators. Imagine a program where you have many similar objects (e.g. a game where you’re being attacked by many zombies, or a simulation where you’re displaying many triangles). If you notice a defect, it can be near impossible to distinguish which object is having problems. However, if each object is given a unique identifier upon creation, then it can be easier to differentiate the objects for further debugging.

Generating a unique ID number is very easy to do with a static duration local variable:

```cpp
int generateID()
{
    static int s_itemID{ 0 };
    return s_itemID++; // makes copy of s_itemID, increments the real s_itemID, then returns the value in the copy
}
```

The first time this function is called, it returns 0. The second time, it returns 1. Each time it is called, it returns a number one higher than the previous time it was called. You can assign these numbers as unique IDs for your objects. Because `s_itemID` is a local variable, it can not be “tampered with” by other functions.

# Static local constants

Static local variables can be made const (or constexpr). One good use for a const static local variable is when you have a function that needs to use a const value, but creating or initializing the object is expensive (e.g. you need to read the value from a database). If you used a normal local variable, the variable would be created and initialized every time the function was executed. With a const/constexpr static local variable, you can create and initialize the expensive object once, and then reuse it whenever the function is called.

**Static local variables should only be used if in your entire program and in the foreseeable future of your program, the variable is unique and it wouldn’t make sense to reset the variable.**