# Qualified and unqualified names

A name can be either qualified or unqualified.

A **qualified name** is a name that includes an associated scope. Most often, names are qualified with a namespace using the scope resolution operator (::). For example:

```cpp
std::cout // identifier cout is qualified by namespace std
::foo // identifier foo is qualified by the global namespace
```

An **unqualified name** is a name that does not include a scoping qualifier. For example, `cout` and `x` are unqualified names, as they do not include an associated scope.

# Using-declarations 

One way to reduce the repetition of typing `std::` over and over is to utilize a using-declaration statement. A **using declaration** allows us to use an unqualified name (with no scope) as an alias for a qualified name.

Here’s our basic Hello world program, using a using-declaration on line 5:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
   using std::cout; // this using declaration tells the compiler that cout should resolve to std::cout
   cout << "Hello world!\n"; // so no std:: prefix is needed here!

   return 0;
} // the using declaration expires at the end of the current scope
```

The using-declaration `using std::cout;` tells the compiler that we’re going to be using the object `cout` from the `std` namespace. So whenever it sees `cout`, it will assume that we mean `std::cout`. If there’s a naming conflict between `std::cout` and some other use of `cout`, `std::cout` will be preferred. Therefore on line 6, we can type `cout` instead of `std::cout`.

# Using-directives

Another way to simplify things is to use a using-directive. Slightly simplified, a **using directive** imports all of the identifiers from a namespace into the scope of the using-directive.

Here’s our Hello world program again, with a using-directive on line 5:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
   using namespace std; // this using directive tells the compiler to import all names from namespace std into the current namespace without qualification
   cout << "Hello world!\n"; // so no std:: prefix is needed here

   return 0;
} // the using-directive expires at the end of the current scope
```

The using-directive `using namespace std;` tells the compiler to import _all_ of the names from the `std` namespace into the current scope (in this case, of function `main()`). When we then use unqualified identifier `cout`, it will resolve to the imported `std::cout`.

[Problems with using-directives](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/using-declarations-and-using-directives/#avoidUsingNamespace)

# Cancelling or replacing a using-statement

Once a using-statement has been declared, there’s no way to cancel or replace it with a different using-statement within the scope in which it was declared.Cancelling or replacing a using-statement

Once a using-statement has been declared, there’s no way to cancel or replace it with a different using-statement within the scope in which it was declared.